# NCCIH (2021-2025) — file: NCCIH_Strategic_Plan_2021-2025.pdf
# 57 pages matched priority-heading patterns


--- PAGE 1 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services — National Institutes of Health
Strategic Plan
Mapping a Pathway to Research 
on Whole Person Health  
FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 3 matched=['Objective 1', 'priority area ', 'strategic plan'] ---
1
Executive Summary
The National Center for Complementary and Integrative 
Health (NCCIH) was created more than 20 years ago to 
facilitate the study and evaluation of complementary and 
alternative health practices. During the past two decades, 
NCCIH has expanded the scientific knowledge base around 
these practices and established resources to disseminate this 
information to the public—ultimately impacting their use. The 
Center has worked to advance the position that evidence-
based complementary therapies should be “integrated” with 
and not used as an “alternative” to conventional medicine.
NCCIH’s new strategic plan for Fiscal Years (FY) 2021–2025 
expands the definition of integrative health to include whole 
person health, that is, empowering individuals, families, 
communities, and populations to improve their health in 
multiple interconnected domains: biological, behavioral, social, 
and environmental. The plan has been informed and shaped 
by an effort to better define and map a path to whole person 
health by expanding and building on current activities while 
advancing new research strategies and ideas. 
The plan has five major objectives:
Objective 1: Advance fundamental science and methods 
development. NCCIH prioritizes research to fill gaps in 
our understanding of the mechanisms by which complex 
complementary approaches exert their effects. We also 
recognize the need for methods development to support 
rigorous studies of complex botanical products, integrated 
multicomponent therapeutic systems, health restoration 
and resilience, and the dissemination and implementation of 
evidence-based complementary approaches.
Objective 2: Advance research on the whole person and 
on the integration of complementary and conventional care. 
NCCIH seeks to support basic, translational, and clinical 
research on the interaction of multiple physiological systems 
and the therapeutic effects of multicomponent interventions. 
The Center is particularly interested in studies conducted in 
real-world settings and research that focuses on improving 
health outcomes.
Objective 3: Foster research on health promotion and restoration, resilience, disease 
prevention, and symptom management. Focused research is needed to understand why 
people make healthy, unhealthy, or risky choices and to elucidate the impact of these 
choices on short- and long-term health. Another priority area for NCCIH is expanding the 
knowledge base about how complementary health approaches may improve resilience, 
restore health, and manage symptoms in both the short and long term.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
National Institutes of Health
“Much progress has been made  
in the research areas that  
form the NCCIH portfolio since 
our last strategic plan was 
released, and we are now ready 
to integrate this knowledge  
into a whole person approach.”
Helene Langevin, M.D.
NCCIH Director
Our Mission
The mission of NCCIH is to 
determine, through rigorous 
scientific investigation, the 
fundamental science, usefulness, 
and safety of complementary 
and integrative health 
approaches and their roles in 
improving health and health care.
Our Vision
Scientific evidence informs 
decision making by the public, 
health care professionals, 
and health policymakers 
regarding the integrated use 
of complementary health 
approaches in a whole person 
health framework. 

--- PAGE 4 matched=['Objective 4', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
2
Objective 4: Enhance the complementary and integrative health research workforce. 
NCCIH supports research training and career development programs to increase the 
number and diversity of well-trained scientists to conduct rigorous complementary and 
integrative health research. The Center will continue to promote strategies to enhance 
diversity of the workforce, enhance the clinician-scientist career pathway at both 
the individual and institutional levels, and enhance the transition of Research Career 
Development (K) awardees to independent research careers.
Objective 5: Provide objective evidence-based information on complementary and 
integrative health interventions. Translating and disseminating scientific information about 
complementary and integrative health to the public is challenging. Misinformation abounds 
on these topics, and individuals who use complementary health interventions often do not 
discuss them with their conventional health care providers. NCCIH will continue to present 
scientifically objective evidence-based information on complementary and integrative health 
and to develop methods and resources to enhance the public’s understanding of basic 
scientific concepts to lay a foundation for improved decision making.
In addition to working toward these specific objectives, NCCIH is committed to serving  
as an efficient and effective steward of public resources:
—  To support the goal of improving women’s and minority health and eliminating health 
disparities, NCCIH will fund research with diverse populations and promote a diverse 
scientific workforce.
—  To ensure that research funded by NCCIH contributes to improved public health and 
health care, NCCIH will set research priorities that reflect public health needs, scientific 
promise, amenability of topics to rigorous scientific inquiry, potential to impact health 
care practices, and relationship to use and practice.
—  NCCIH will continue to seek out opportunities to collaborate with other components of 
the National Institutes of Health (NIH), other Federal agencies, professional societies, 
patient advocacy groups, and others. Through these collaborations, the Center 
enhances its research portfolio, expands its multidisciplinary expertise, and incorporates 
a broader understanding of the health needs and perspectives of the community.
CC I HN
Includes complementary 
therapies, practices, and 
systems that use nutritional, 
physical, and/or psychological 
approaches and may have 
originated outside of 
conventional medicine 
Advances research on the 
integration of complementary 
and conventional care and 
integrative approaches to 
physiology, pathophysiology, 
and treatment
Addresses health promotion 
and restoration, resilience, 
disease prevention, and 
symptom management 
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Executive Summary
As part of the strategic planning 
process, NCCIH has examined 
the meaning of the terms 
complementary, integrative, and 
health in the Center’s name and 
has transitioned to more inclusive 
definitions to reflect a whole 
person approach.

--- PAGE 5 matched=['Objective 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
3
 
 
Contents
 5  Director’s Message
  9 Introduction
17 Objective 1: Advance Fundamental Science and Methods Development
—  Advance basic and mechanistic research relevant to nutritional, psychological, and/or 
physical approaches.
—  Develop methods, tools, and technologies to study complementary health diagnostic, 
treatment, and prevention modalities and systems.
—  Develop outcome measures to quantify health restoration and resilience.
—  Develop methods to conduct implementation science and effectiveness research on 
complementary and integrative health approaches.
25 Objective 2:  Advance Research on the Whole Person and on the  
 Integration of Complementary and Conventional Care
—  Promote basic and translational research to study how physiological systems interact 
with each other.
—  Conduct clinical and translational research on multicomponent interventions, and 
study the impact of these interventions on multiple physiological systems (e.g., 
nervous, gastrointestinal, and immune systems) and domains (e.g., biological, 
behavioral, social, environmental).
—  Foster multicomponent intervention research that focuses on improving health 
outcomes.
—  Conduct studies in real world settings, where interventions are routinely delivered, to 
test the integration of complementary approaches into health care.
31 Objective 3: Foster Research on Health Promotion and Restoration,  
 Resilience, Disease Prevention, and Symptom Management
—  Advance the understanding of mechanisms through which complementary and 
integrative health approaches affect health restoration, resilience, and well-being.
—  Investigate the safety and efficacy of complementary health approaches and 
integrative treatment strategies for health promotion and restoration, resilience, 
disease prevention, and symptom management in diverse populations and settings.
—  Conduct rigorous clinical studies on the effectiveness, dissemination, and 
implementation of complementary health approaches into health care.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 6 matched=['Objective 4', 'Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
4
37 Objective 4: Enhance the Complementary and Integrative Health Research Workforce
—  Support research training and career development opportunities to increase the 
diversity and number of well-trained scientists conducting rigorous, cutting-edge 
research on complementary and integrative health practices.
—  Foster interdisciplinary collaborations and partnerships at individual and  
institutional levels.
41 Objective 5: Provide Objective, Evidence-Based Information  
 on Complementary and Integrative Health Interventions
—  Disseminate evidence-based information on complementary and integrative health 
interventions, as well as information about ongoing research, including whole person 
research, that examines the connections that exist across domains of human health.
—  Continue to develop methods and approaches to enhance public understanding of 
basic scientific concepts and biomedical research.
45 Serving as an Efficient and Effective Steward of Public Resources
53 Top Scientific Priorities
54 Research on Whole Person Health
56 Interoception Research
58 Health Restoration, Resilience, Disease Prevention, and Health Promotion  
Across the Lifespan
61 Implementation Science for Complementary and Integrative Health
63 Complementary and Integrative Management of Pain
66 Complex Interactions Involving Nutritional Interventions
69 Enhancing the Complementary and Integrative Health Research Workforce
72 Mechanisms and Biomarkers of Mind and Body Approaches
74 Supporting Impactful Clinical Trials of Complementary and Integrative  
Health Approaches
76 Communications Strategies and Tools To Enhance Scientific Literacy and 
Understanding of Clinical Research
78 Appendix
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Contents

--- PAGE 7 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
5
 
 
Director’ s Message
This unprecedented year has been a reminder of the importance of rigorous scientific 
investigation in ensuring and promoting human health. COVID-19 may be the first major 
pandemic we have seen in our lifetimes, but Americans have been facing the realities 
of “noncommunicable epidemics” for some time—opioid abuse, chronic pain, obesity, 
diabetes, and suicide. These persistent and related public health crises underline the 
systemic challenges we must recognize and take on if we are to improve our society’s 
overall state of health. Multiple chronic conditions in individuals, such as obesity, diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, and degenerative joint disease, are not only comorbid with chronic 
pain, depression, opioid addiction, and suicide but also share common contributing factors 
such as poor diet, sedentary lifestyle, environmental exposures, and chronic stress—often 
the consequences of poverty and food and housing insecurity. The domino effect of 
chronic conditions is seen in the disproportionate toll they take on Latino, Black, American 
Indian, Alaska Native, and other communities that are often underserved in our health care 
ecosystem. We have certainly witnessed the dire consequences of these effects during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, which illustrates how chronic underlying conditions pose immediate 
and long-term risks to those infected.
Now, more than ever, we need to look at the multiple factors that promote either health or 
disease and scientifically consider the whole person as a complex system in which health 
and disease are part of a bidirectional continuum. Our current biomedical research model 
is superb in advancing the diagnosis and pharmacologic treatment of organ-specific 
diseases with growing precision. This knowledge is based on an increasingly sophisticated 
understanding of pathogenesis, or the mechanisms by which diseases occur. On the other 
hand, health restoration through self-care, lifestyle, or behavioral interventions is much less 
studied. Examples of health restoration, or “salutogenesis,” would be the return to health 
after an acute viral illness or flareup of a chronic condition; normalization of cholesterol, 
hemoglobin A1C, and/or blood pressure in a patient with metabolic syndrome through 
lifestyle modification; and return to function and mobility following a musculoskeletal injury. 
We currently do not know whether salutogenesis consists of “pathogenesis in reverse” or 
whether it requires some specific salutogenic or healing pathways to be engaged to bring 
an individual back toward health. Unlike the treatment of disease with drugs that target 
specific molecular pathways, health restoration through salutogenesis is likely complex  
and multifactorial and involves the whole person. Advancing research on whole person 
health will support the investigation of nondrug and noninvasive approaches to improve  
and restore health.
Meeting this challenge is right up our alley. By its nature, the mission of NCCIH includes 
both integration and health. NCCIH was created more than 20 years ago to facilitate 
the study and evaluation of complementary and alternative medical practices and to 
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 8 matched=['strategic plan', 'Vision', 'mission'] ---
6
disseminate the resulting information to the public. Over time, we incorporated a focus on 
integrative health research to bring conventional and complementary approaches together 
in a safe, coordinated way with the goal of improving clinical care for patients, promoting 
health, and preventing disease. Now, we are expanding our definition of integrative 
health to include whole person health, or empowering individuals, families, communities, 
and populations to improve their health in multiple interconnected domains: biological, 
behavioral, social, and environmental. This strategic plan, built on the foundation NCCIH 
has fostered for two decades, continues to advance our mission through an effort to 
better define and map a path to whole person health. We will do this by building on current 
activities and existing collaborations with other NIH Institutes, Centers, and Offices while 
advancing new strategies and ideas. The objectives and strategies listed here will also 
be considered through the lens of minority health and health disparities, such that the 
knowledge they generate is inclusive of populations with the greatest needs.
The objectives and strategies presented in this 5-year plan reflect our continued 
commitment to advancing fundamental science and methods development for both basic 
and clinical research. We also present strategies to advance research on whole person 
health and the integration of complementary and conventional care. And with the goal of 
improving and restoring health rather than just treating disease, we offer strategies to foster 
research on health promotion and restoration, resilience, disease prevention, and symptom 
management. As always, we remain committed to enhancing the complementary and 
integrative health research workforce and disseminating what we learn. 
From April 2020 through July 2020, we offered stakeholders several ways to contribute their 
thoughts and feedback on this plan. This included responding to a request for information 
(RFI) (https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-AT-20-013.html) using a web form 
or by email. The Center broadly disseminated information throughout the process to its 
many stakeholder groups and individuals. In May 2020, we hosted the webinar and town 
hall Whole Person Health: Mapping a Strategic Vision for NCCIH ( https://www.nccih.nih.
gov/news/events/whole-person-health-mapping-a-strategic-vision-for-nccih-webinar-town-
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Director’s Message
Health
Disease
Individual
Family
Biological
Behavioral
Social
EnvironmentalEnvironmental
Community
PopulationMultilevel Whole Person  
 Health Framework

--- PAGE 9 matched=['strategic plan', 'research areas'] ---
7
hall) in conjunction with the International Congress on Integrative Medicine and Health. In 
July 2020, a Center-hosted Town Hall and Public Comment Session (https://www.nccih.
nih.gov/news/events/nccih-strategic-planning-town-hall-public-comment-session) invited 
comments from stakeholders, experts, communities, and members of the public, including 
but not limited to researchers and trainees across academia, industry, and government; 
health care providers and health advocacy organizations; nongovernmental, scientific, and 
professional organizations; and Federal agencies.
The draft strategic plan was posted to the NCCIH website in February 2021, and an  
RFI was issued for public comment on the draft ( https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/
notice-files/NOT-AT-21-005.html). The National Advisory Council for Complementary and 
Integrative Health provided input into the strategic planning process and received  
updates during its public sessions in September 2019; February, June, and September 
2020; and January 2021.
As director of the Center, I am confident that our diligence in hearing from a diverse group 
of stakeholders has helped us develop a set of research priorities guided by attention to 
public health needs, scientific promise, amenability of topics to rigorous scientific inquiry, 
potential to impact health care practices, and relationship to use and practice. We know 
that priorities can change—2020 certainly taught us that—so we must always have our 
ears to the ground and our eyes on the sky. Priorities and innovation can come through 
investigator-initiated applications as well as from programmatically directed funding 
initiatives. We must always be agile and responsive to challenges and opportunities that 
come our way.
Much progress has been made in the research areas that form the NCCIH portfolio  
since our last strategic plan was released, but there is still much to do. As we look forward 
to the next 5 years, we will continuously think strategically about existing programs and 
priorities, the growing evidence base, research capacity, scientific opportunities, and public 
health needs.
— Helene Langevin, M.D.
    NCCIH Director
Mapping a Pathway to Research on Whole Person Health

--- PAGE 10 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
8
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 11 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'Vision', 'Mission'] ---
9
 
 
Introduction
Mission The mission of NCCIH is to determine, 
through rigorous scientific investigation, the fundamental 
science, usefulness, and safety of complementary and 
integrative health approaches and their roles in improving 
health and health care.
Vision Scientific evidence informs decision 
making by the public, health care professionals, and 
health policymakers regarding the integrated use of 
complementary health approaches in a whole person  
health framework.
NCCIH is the lead Federal agency for scientific research on the fundamental science, 
usefulness, and safety of complementary and integrative treatments and practices. To 
address the need for objective evidence on the safety and efficacy of these approaches, 
NCCIH supports rigorous scientific investigation to better understand how these 
interventions impact health, for whom, and the optimal methods of practice and delivery.
NCCIH supports research on a diverse group of nondrug and noninvasive health practices 
encompassing nutritional, psychological, and physical approaches that may have originated 
outside of conventional medicine, many of which are gradually being integrated into 
mainstream health care. These include natural products, such as dietary supplements, 
plant-based products, and probiotics, as well as mind and body approaches, such as 
yoga, massage therapy, meditation, mindfulness-based stress reduction, spinal/joint 
manipulation, and acupuncture. In clinical practice, these approaches are often combined 
into multicomponent therapeutic systems, such as traditional Chinese medicine, Ayurveda, 
chiropractic, osteopathy, and naturopathy, that have distinctive underlying diagnostic 
and theoretical frameworks. Integrative health care seeks to bring conventional and 
complementary approaches together in a safe, coordinated way with the goal of improving 
clinical care for patients, restoring health, promoting resilience, and preventing disease.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 12 matched=['strategic plan', 'vision', 'mission'] ---
10
NCCIH, formerly known as the National Center for Complementary and Alternative 
Medicine (NCCAM), was created more than 20 years ago to facilitate the study and 
evaluation of complementary and alternative medical practices and to disseminate 
the resulting information to the public. At that time, these practices were growing in 
popularity and availability, but little was known about their safety and efficacy. In addition, 
people rarely discussed their use of complementary approaches with their health care 
providers; many were unaware that certain natural products may interfere with prescribed 
medications; and some used these approaches as an alternative to conventional medical 
care. NCCIH was created to address this scientific and public health need. In addition, 
NCCIH has worked to advance the position that evidence-based complementary therapies 
should be “integrated” with and not used as an “alternative” to conventional medicine.  
The name of the Center was changed in 2014 from NCCAM to NCCIH to reinforce this 
position. In the last 20 years, the Center has helped build the infrastructure to conduct 
rigorous scientific research on complementary health approaches. The Center has 
expanded the scientific knowledge base around these practices and established resources 
to disseminate this information to the public—ultimately impacting their use. As we look  
to the future, NCCIH will build upon the foundation established over the last 20 years to 
propel the field forward.
 
Building a Path to Whole Person Health 
Whole person health is not altogether a new goal. A whole person health perspective has 
been central to NCCIH’s mission dating back to its origins. The Center’s current definition 
of “integrative health” refers to treatment of the whole person as opposed to separate organ 
systems. Integrative health also aims for well-coordinated care among different providers 
and institutions by bringing conventional and complementary approaches together to care 
for the whole person. Further, one of the Center’s longstanding strategic objectives is to 
foster health promotion and disease prevention, central tenets of whole person health. 
This strategic plan has been informed and shaped by an effort to better define and map a 
path to whole person health by expanding and building on current activities while advancing 
new research strategies and ideas to promote its realization. The concept of whole person 
health will continue to evolve, just as the concept of complementary medicine has changed 
over time as the line between conventional and complementary medicine has increasingly 
become blurred.
What Is Whole Person Health?
Whole person health is a concept and a vision as well as an organizing principle. There 
are many ways to promote and achieve it, and methods and strategies will evolve as 
understanding and refinement of this concept mature over time. 
Any kind of knowledge base includes both analysis and synthesis: analysis breaks things 
down into individual components, and synthesis puts them back together to understand 
the whole. For more than a century, biomedicine has been strongly pulled toward analysis, 
from its early organization into organ systems in the late nineteenth century to cellular 
and molecular biology with its increasingly detailed understanding of cells, molecules, 
genetics, and signaling pathways. In the last few decades, systems biology, derived from 
ecology, has begun to influence biomedica

--- PAGE 14 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
12
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How To Study Whole Person Health? 
Research on whole person health aims to identify the gaps in our knowledge of the 
progression from health to disease and from disease back to health. It also may identify 
gaps in integration of care to develop multicomponent interventions that not only prevent 
progression to disease but also restore an improved state of health, as well as systems-
level interventions to improve access to and/or reimbursement for these interventions. In 
addition, complementary health approaches such as yoga, mindfulness meditation, and tai 
chi impact multiple systems of the body (e.g., respiratory, neural, and musculoskeletal). This 
makes thinking about health in terms of the whole person important to understanding the 
role of complementary approaches in promoting health and preventing disease. 
Strategic plans in the early history of the Center expressed an interest in exploring many 
paths, including research on systems of care such as traditional Chinese medicine, 
Ayurveda, and naturopathy. This type of research is challenging to conduct, and there were 
many stumbling blocks along the way. Figuring out the right methods for studying complex 
interventions was perplexing. As a result, many of the studies did not bear fruit. 
In subsequent years, there was a concerted effort to address this problem by focusing  
on specific strategically chosen areas, such as natural products and mind and body 
therapies. There was also a decision to focus on symptom management, especially for 
pain, anxiety, and depression, which are some of the main reasons driving the use of 
complementary therapies. NCCIH also supported methods development for both basic 
science and clinical trials. The development of methodologies for conducting rigorous 
pragmatic trials was particularly important and will be invaluable for conducting research  
on whole person health. 
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Introduction
Integrated Approach to  
Multisystem Health Restoration
Psychological
stress
Sedentary
lifestyle
Poor diet
Self care
Multicomponent 
interventions
Psychological
Nutritional
Physical
Healthy Less Healthy Disease

--- PAGE 16 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
14
Reframing How We Think About  
Natural Products and Mind and Body Practices
Until now, NCCIH has classified its extramural research portfolio into two areas—mind and 
body practices and natural products. However, the field of complementary and integrative 
health is expanding and the line between conventional and complementary approaches 
is blurring. Therefore, we propose that it is time to reframe the way we think about the 
research we support into new categories: nutritional, psychological, and physical. 
To ensure continuity, the Center is not abandoning its mind and body practices and 
natural products terminology or research but is recategorizing the approaches that fall 
within our research mission based on their primary therapeutic input. This categorization 
illustrates where there are partially overlapping boundaries, including with pharmacologic 
drugs and devices. For example, a single natural product can be available as a food or 
food component, dietary supplement, or medication (e.g., niacin). Foods, probiotics, and 
dietary supplements, such as fish oil, are often used as part of a healthy diet and are also 
frequently recommended by practitioners. Mind and body practices, such as mindfulness-
based stress reduction, can overlap with more conventional practices like psychotherapy. 
For example, cognitive behavioral therapy increasingly incorporates relaxation, meditation, 
and other modalities.
Many of the mind and body therapies, such as yoga, tai chi, and acupuncture, have 
both physical and psychological components. There is also an overlap between the 
psychological and nutritional categories in the form of mindful eating. 
 
Looking at complementary therapies one by one is still important and necessary, but 
it is also important to think about how these therapies are used in combinations as 
multicomponent interventions. 
  
CC I HN
Includes complementary 
therapies, practices, and 
systems that use nutritional, 
physical, and/or psychological 
approaches and may have 
originated outside of 
conventional medicine 
Advances research on the 
integration of complementary 
and conventional care and 
integrative approaches to 
physiology, pathophysiology, 
and treatment
Addresses health promotion 
and restoration, resilience, 
disease prevention, and 
symptom management 
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Introduction

--- PAGE 18 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
16
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 19 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
17
1OBJECTIVE
 
Advance Fundamental Science  
and Methods Development
Fundamental scientific inquiry is essential to the 
progress of biomedical research because it enhances 
the understanding of how living systems work. This 
understanding serves as a foundation for translational  
and clinical studies that can lead to improved approaches 
for the management, treatment, and prevention of  
numerous symptoms and conditions and an ultimate 
restoration of health.
NCCIH’s basic research seeks to understand the nature and scientific principles of 
complementary health approaches such as their biology, physiology, and physical, 
chemical, and behavioral properties. This includes research on basic physiological and 
pathophysiological mechanisms relevant to complementary and integrative health. It also 
includes identifying and understanding the active components of a complementary health 
approach and how these components produce effects. Depending on the question, basic 
and mechanistic studies may be performed in the laboratory, in experimental models, or 
with human volunteers. The development of tools, models, measures, and methodologies 
for performing these investigations is at the cornerstone of NCCIH’s mission. 
From the outset, complementary and integrative health research has addressed and 
met methodological challenges stemming from the recognition that natural products are 
complex mixtures, and that interventions such as yoga involve both contemplative and 
movement practices. Given the complexity of the approaches we study, the development of 
sound research design and analytic methods is vital to NCCIH’s mission. 
STRATEGIES
1  
Advance basic and mechanistic research relevant to  
nutritional, psychological, and/or physical approaches.
Nutritional approaches
NCCIH has a broad interest in studying the biological activities of natural products, such 
as prebiotics, probiotics, dietary supplements, botanicals, and vitamins. A strong research 
emphasis is placed on products for which there is compelling preclinical evidence for 
potential biological activity that may lead to a health benefit or treatment intervention, and/
or products that are widely used by the American public. Many of the natural products used 
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 20 matched=['OBJECTIVE 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
18
by individuals are complex, with multiple molecular constituents that may contribute  
to their effects. To fully understand the activity of complex mixtures, it is necessary to 
identify the individual components responsible for a specific activity and determine how 
those components interact with other components and biological targets. Preclinical  
model systems are valuable for these studies. Clinical trials of natural products are 
maximally informative if they incorporate well-formulated biological hypotheses, are built 
on a sound foundation of basic mechanistic and pharmacologic understanding, and 
incorporate assessment of defined signatures of biological effects. Thus, the design  
of maximally informative clinical efficacy trials of natural products requires mechanistic 
insight as a first step.
The CARBON Program
Plants and plant-derived products are widely consumed for basic nutrition, to promote 
health and well-being, and for medicinal purposes, worldwide and in the United States. 
Despite this prevalent use, the mechanisms of action and efficacy of many of these 
products have not been rigorously evaluated, and the challenges of doing research 
on these complex materials continue to slow progress toward understanding their 
contributions to public health. The Consortium for Advancing Research on Botanicals and 
Other Natural Products (CARBON) Program was launched in 1999 to support research into 
the safety, effectiveness, and mechanisms of action of botanical dietary supplements that 
have a high potential to benefit human health.
The CARBON program had its origins with a small number of Botanical Research Centers 
funded originally in 1999 in response to a Congressional mandate to the Office of Dietary 
Supplements (ODS) to initiate a program to support botanical research. NCCIH has 
been a partner on this program from the beginning. Together NCCIH and ODS funded 
Botanical Research Centers that were tasked with identifying and characterizing botanicals, 
assessing the chemical components of botanicals, exploring their mechanisms of action, 
conducting preclinical and clinical evaluations, and training the next generation of scientific 
researchers. NCCIH and ODS continue to shape the program to tackle the scientific 
gaps in the field while also addressing shared research priorities. In 2015 and 2020, new 
components were added to the program focusing on development of novel technology 
looking at how natural products can affect the many features of cells and specific proteins 
and on the development of a new nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) data repository. 
These and other innovative approaches will break through existing bottlenecks that have 
hampered progress in natural products research. These additions have ushered in a more 
collaborative environment for the program where the Centers work closely with each other 
on specific projects.
In the 20-year history of the program, the Centers have provided rigorous scientific data 
on the usefulness of a wide range of botanical products, generated research resulting 
in hundreds of peer-reviewed publications, and trained numerous early-stage scientists. 
Many of the botanical supplements studied in these Centers—such as black cohosh, bitter 
melon, chasteberry, fenugreek, grape seed extract, hops, maca, milk thistle, licorice, and 
valerian—are among the top 100 supplements consumed in the United States based on 
sales data. The data generated from these and other

--- PAGE 21 matched=['research area'] ---
19
NCCIH will continue to support research on isolated natural product compounds  
as well as on the complex mixtures from which they originate. Studies may also focus 
on both the potential beneficial and harmful effects of natural products, including 
their interactions with medications. NCCIH-supported studies may also include the 
characterization of novel natural products or discovering the biological activity of  
chemical constituents in a complex mixture. 
The possibilities of drug interactions, direct toxicities, and contamination with active 
pharmaceutical agents or environmental chemicals are among the safety concerns about 
dietary and herbal supplements. Although there is a widespread public perception that 
herbs and botanical products in dietary supplements are safe, research has demonstrated 
that these products may carry the same dangers as other pharmacologically active 
substances. Interactions may occur among prescription drugs, over-the-counter drugs, 
dietary supplements, and even small molecules in food—making it a daunting challenge 
to identify all interactions that are of clinical concern. While studies in human subjects are 
the only way to establish definitive evidence of a clinically relevant drug interaction, the 
justification for the investment in such a trial is often built on in vitro data. 
For example, NCCIH is supporting a Center of Excellence for Natural Product Drug 
Interaction Research that is focused, in part, on conducting rigorous human subject  
studies to establish the clinical relevance of interactions for selected natural products. 
NCCIH also supports rigorous screening of natural product libraries in assays with  
clear relevance to human metabolism for evidence of pharmacokinetic interactions. 
The data generated will provide additional information on potential interactions and will 
help inform prioritization strategies regarding which natural products may warrant future 
investments in clinical studies.
NCCIH will also continue to support research to elucidate the effects of probiotics and 
prebiotics on the microbiota naturally present in the human body. NCCIH seeks to address 
fundamental knowledge gaps, including those pertaining to molecular mechanisms of 
action of the microbiota and potential interactions with pre- and probiotics and their impact 
on processes in the human body. NCCIH will continue to work closely with other NIH 
Institutes, Centers, and Offices; the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA); and the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture to leverage its investments in this research area.
Psychological and physical approaches 
Among complementary physical and psychological approaches are mindfulness-based 
cognitive therapy, tai chi, yoga, acupuncture, massage, spinal/joint manipulation, art 
therapy, music therapy, dance, meditation, mindfulness-based stress reduction, and many 
others. These approaches are widely used by the public and may help meet the need 
for nondrug approaches for the management of pain and other common, troublesome 
symptoms, which may benefit from a diversity of interventions that are safer than drugs 
and have fewer adverse effects. They may also play a role in interventions to optimize 
health. Included within the physical and psychological approaches are the qualities of 
patient–provider relationships and patient engagement. However, there are gaps in the 
understanding of the mechanisms by which these approaches exert their effects, and th

--- PAGE 22 matched=['OBJECTIVE 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
20
their effects. NCCIH seeks to support the investigation of the fundamental science relevant 
to physical and psychological approaches, including mind/brain-focused practices (e.g., 
meditation, relaxation techniques, hypnosis), body-based approaches (e.g., acupuncture, 
massage, spinal/joint manipulation/mobilization), meditative exercise (e.g., yoga, tai chi, qi 
gong), art and music therapies, or integrative approaches combining several components. 
This may include rigorous fundamental science on less well-studied aspects of the body 
(e.g., human biofield, hormesis) that may be relevant to complementary therapies.
Mechanistic research on mind and body approaches can address three key aspects. The 
first is the approach itself: What components impact the biological system or subjective 
experience? The second is the biological system potentially targeted by the approach: What 
cellular systems or hormonal, genetic, or neural mediators, for example, are influenced by 
the intervention? The third is the mechanisms: What are the key processes (i.e., biological, 
biophysical, and/or behavioral) by which the approach exerts its effects?
2  
Develop methods, tools, and technologies to study complementary 
health diagnostic, treatment, and prevention modalities and systems.  
NCCIH’s clinical research currently supports trials of both natural products and mind 
and body interventions and includes early- and mid-phase testing to assess biological 
signatures of these interventions in humans (and replication of these effects), define 
appropriate dosage, refine the components and system of intervention delivery, determine 
optimal frequency or duration of the intervention, assess feasibility, and enhance 
adherence. The Center also supports later stage full-scale efficacy, effectiveness, or 
pragmatic trials when the evidence base is sufficient to justify them. 
Rigorous research on complementary health approaches requires well-established 
methodologies, including valid, reliable, and relevant research tools and outcome 
measures. NCCIH seeks to support the development of improved quantitative and 
qualitative methodologies for complementary health research, especially those that can 
be used to assess symptoms, multisystem interactions, patient engagement, health 
restoration, and resilience. Studies that identify and validate objective endpoints or 
biomarkers predicting therapeutic response, assess and measure adherence or treatment 
fidelity, or otherwise strengthen the design of clinical trials of complementary health 
approaches are particularly important. 
NCCIH is also interested in the study of multicomponent systems including those with 
diagnostic and therapeutic frameworks different from those of conventional medicine. 
Studying these systems is more difficult than studying individual treatment modalities. 
However, if done with appropriate scientific rigor, it could help inform or complement areas 
of conventional medicine, as well as the systems of care themselves. Research on this 
topic might begin with studies to test the reliability and validity of complementary diagnostic 
systems. The development of rigorous and reproducible treatment protocols is also needed 
for use in clinical trials to assess their efficacy.
Catalyze advances in natural products methodology
Natural products have a long and impressive history as sources of medicine and as 
important resources for biological research. However, many of the techniques 

--- PAGE 24 matched=['OBJECTIVE 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
22
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. Define treatment algorithms for complementary interventions and systems 
and establish their fidelity and reproducibility  
Studying complementary systems is going to require the development of reproducible 
intervention models, new methodologies, and outcome assessment measures for 
study in rigorous clinical trials. This process can also be termed “manualization,” 
where a treatment manual is developed through collaboration between practitioners 
and researchers. The manual provides guidelines for diagnosis and treatment using 
complementary systems. This approach allows for standardization of the system and 
facilitates analysis and reproducibility. Different approaches to analysis of outcomes may 
need to be employed in research on complementary systems. For example, the real-
world perception of an individual regarding the benefits of treatment may be important in 
this context. NCCIH is interested in pragmatic efficacy or effectiveness trials to test the 
effects of a manualized intervention.
c. Develop, refine, and test clinical research models and relevant statistical 
methods for testing multicomponent interventions and systems  
There is a need for research to evaluate multicomponent interventions as they are 
used and delivered to determine whether they are safe and effective. For clinical trials 
to address this need, they must be well designed and test hypotheses that will guide 
decisions about the inclusion of a multicomponent approach in the delivery of health 
care for a specific condition. To that end, it is typically necessary to conduct a series 
of early-phase clinical trials to gather the multiple types of preliminary data needed to 
design subsequent large and rigorous efficacy or effectiveness studies. Although the 
scientific literature may provide the rationale for conducting an efficacy or effectiveness 
trial, investigators often lack critical information about key variables needed to 
implement a complex intervention in a clinical trial. Some key aspects that may need 
further investigation to plan the future trial could include finalizing the multicomponent 
intervention or system delivery method, the outcome measure(s), or the recruitment 
strategy necessary to design an efficacy or effectiveness trial. Early-phase clinical trials 
can fill this information gap, thereby improving study design and knowledge of whether 
a complex intervention can be implemented in a trial with fidelity and reproducibility; 
whether participants will adhere to the multicomponent intervention; and the overall 
feasibility of the trial. Later phase trials can further explore, develop, and test adaptive 
interventions; optimize or tailor a multicomponent intervention to have a greater impact 
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
OBJECTIVE 1   Advance Fundamental Science and Methods Development
 
Complementary Therapies
Nutritional, physical, or  
 psychological approaches 
 
May have originated outside   
of conventional medicine
Multicomponent   
Interventions and Systems
Multicomponent interventions 
combine multiple approaches  
 that address different aspects   
of a person 
Multicomponent systems may 
 use diagnostic and therapeutic 
frameworks that are different from 
those of conventional medicine

--- PAGE 26 matched=['OBJECTIVE 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
24
3  
Develop outcome measures to quantify  
health restoration and resilience.  
It is difficult to quantify health, health restoration, and resilience. Validated outcome 
measures are needed if research is to advance in this area. Many scales to measure 
resilience have been published, and it is important to further examine these and to develop 
new outcome measures to quantify both physical and psychological resilience. The 
development of outcome measures for health restoration must consider what is important 
to each person in terms of restoring their own health. Also important is the development 
of technology and outcome measures for mechanistic studies (e.g., data from wearables 
could be used to determine the relationship to subjective self-report measures).
4  
Develop methods to conduct implementation science and effectiveness 
research on complementary and integrative health approaches.  
Published results of efficacy and effectiveness studies on complementary health 
approaches should lead to widespread uptake of evidence-based practices, but too 
often, the scientific pathway ends prematurely, before the best ways to improve adoption, 
implementation, and sustainability can be determined. NCCIH supports the full continuum 
of the research pipeline, whereby a complementary health intervention moves from 
basic and mechanistic research, through efficacy trials, and through dissemination and 
implementation, including systems-level research addressing access and reimbursement 
for interventions. Whereas efficacy and effectiveness studies are designed to answer the 
question, “Which intervention(s) should we use?” dissemination research asks, “Are the 
relevant clinicians and target population aware of the novel evidence-based intervention(s)?” 
Implementation science focuses on “How can these novel evidence-based intervention(s) 
be more widely and rapidly used in practice?” It should be noted that for complementary 
and integrative health, the novel evidence-based intervention may be an existing 
intervention used in a novel setting (e.g., use of acupuncture in a hospital emergency 
department). The goal is to decrease the time between establishing the evidence base 
of interventions and the widespread uptake and adoption of these interventions. The 
development of methods to conduct implementation science and effectiveness research on 
complementary and integrative health approaches is a high priority for NCCIH.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
OBJECTIVE 1   Advance Fundamental Science and Methods Development

--- PAGE 27 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
25
2OBJECTIVE
Advance Research on the Whole 
Person and on the Integration of 
Complementary and Conventional Care
Central to the definition of whole person research are 
studies of integrated multicomponent therapies and 
interconnected systems. These address multiple aspects 
of a person and may involve diagnostic and therapeutic 
frameworks different from those of conventional medicine. 
Whole person research includes three components: 
exploring the fundamental science of interconnected 
systems, investigating multicomponent interventions or 
therapeutic systems, and examining the impact of these 
interventions on multisystem or multiorgan outcomes. 
The current NCCIH portfolio includes research on natural products as well as mind and body 
approaches (both psychological and physical). Currently, much of the mind and body portfolio 
studies single systems (e.g., nervous system) while the natural products portfolio focuses 
more on outcomes involving multiple systems (e.g., digestive, metabolic, immune).
 
With this objective, NCCIH plans to support the development of methodologies to better 
understand how to study interconnected systems, how to investigate multicomponent 
interventions or therapeutic systems and their integration, and how to examine the impact of 
these interventions on multisystem or multiorgan outcomes. 
STRATEGIES
1  
Promote basic and translational research to study  
how physiological systems interact with each other.  
Over the years, much of the NCCIH research portfolio has evolved to become somewhat 
homogeneous—for example, research on meditation, mindfulness, and yoga, all of which 
remain important. However, exciting opportunities are emerging to carefully explore new 
paths toward whole person research. This will require both fundamental science and 
methods development using a range of approaches to address multiple aspects of a 
person or animal model. Mechanistic research may, as appropriate, study the impact of 
single or multicomponent interventions (experimental input or independent variables) on 
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 28 matched=['OBJECTIVE 2', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
26
single or multisystem outcomes (output or dependent variables). Rigorous methods (e.g., 
factorial designs, principal component analyses) will be needed to support these variably 
complex study designs. The use of artificial intelligence to analyze multidimensional 
datasets offers exciting new opportunities that can be applied to whole person research, 
including identifying temporal changes in multisystem physiological patterns and defining 
the phenotypes of individuals more or less likely to respond to a treatment.
 
A comprehensive program in whole person research can collectively support a balance of 
analytical and synthetic approaches to elucidate individual mechanisms and understand 
how these mechanisms interact.
2  
Conduct clinical and translational research on multicomponent 
interventions, and study the impact of these interventions on multiple  
  physiological systems (e.g., nervous, gastrointestinal, and immune  
  systems) and domains (e.g., biological, behavioral, social, environmental).  
NCCIH hopes to expand research on integrated multicomponent therapies. One challenge 
in clinical research on complex interventions is that researchers may want to tailor 
the interventions to specific populations, study individual components, or change the 
intervention to make it more convenient, but these modifications may make replication 
difficult and reduce the effect size of the intervention. It is important to have a reproducible 
intervention or algorithm of care that can be consistently delivered by different clinicians 
at different sites to conduct multisite trials to assess efficacy or effectiveness of the 
multicomponent intervention. Another challenge is how to power a study for multiple 
primary outcomes. NCCIH is also interested in the development of innovative strategies to 
evaluate multiple outcomes in a single trial.
3  
Foster multicomponent intervention research  
that focuses on improving health outcomes.  
NCCIH-supported research has demonstrated that mind and body therapies are effective 
at improving symptoms in conditions such as pain and anxiety. While these therapies 
have shown promise, the efficacy of any single-modality treatment is typically modest, 
and finding a way to enhance the effect size of clinical outcomes is a crucially important 
goal. Multicomponent strategies may enhance the benefit to individuals by simultaneously 
targeting multiple pathways and may be more effective than a treatment used in isolation. 
It is also important to study multicomponent interventions that combine conventional and 
complementary approaches.
There is a fundamental lack of translational research on the mechanisms of resilience and 
health restoration in humans. In particular, the mechanisms of nutritional, psychological, 
and physical interventions in restoring health after an acute illness or recovery from  
a chronic condition are an understudied area that needs a multisystem approach to  
identify mechanisms and predictive biomarkers that could be used to optimize their  
effects. NCCIH seeks to support research that could expand the mechanistic and  
evidence base on complementary health approaches for preventing mental, emotional,  
and behavioral disorders and for promoting psychological and physical health, resilience, 
and health restoration.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
OBJECTIVE 2   Advance Research on the Whole Person and  
on the Integration of Complementary and Conventional Care

--- PAGE 30 matched=['OBJECTIVE 2', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
28
Pain Research Supported by  
NCCIH Through Pragmatic Trials
Pain is the most common medical condition requiring treatment among military personnel. 
Studies report nearly 45 percent of active-duty military personnel and 50 percent of 
veterans experience pain on a regular basis, and there is significant overlap among chronic 
pain, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and persistent post-concussive symptoms. 
Data from the 2010–2014 National Health Interview Survey show that American veterans 
experience a higher prevalence of pain and more severe pain than nonveterans.1 Although 
opioids are often prescribed to treat chronic pain, there is no evidence to suggest they 
are effective, and they are often associated with severe adverse effects and may lead to 
drug addiction, overdose, and death. Therefore, there is a need for nondrug approaches 
to complement current strategies for pain management and to reduce the need for, and 
hazards of, excessive reliance on opioids. 
In 2017 , NCCIH partnered with the DoD, the VA, and seven other Institutes and Centers 
at NIH to launch the NIH-DoD-VA PMC (https://painmanagementcollaboratory.org). The 
PMC seeks to support the development, implementation, and testing of cost-effective, 
large-scale, real-world research on nonpharmacologic approaches for pain management 
and related conditions in military and veteran health care delivery organizations. The 
PMC is currently supporting 11 pragmatic, large-scale clinical trials. Of these trials, NIH 
is supporting six, the DoD is supporting four, and the VA is supporting one. Examples 
of interventions being investigated for their effectiveness in pain management include 
cognitive behavioral therapy delivered by phone, stepped-care management, behavioral 
health consultation in primary care, manual therapy such as chiropractic care, and 
percutaneous peripheral nerve stimulation. NIH is also supporting a coordinating center 
that provides technical, design, and other support to the research teams during this 
demonstration phase and will disseminate collaboratory-endorsed policies, best practices, 
and lessons learned from the demonstration projects. 
All the studies supported by the PMC will not only assess if specific nonpharmacologic 
approaches are effective for pain management but also how they can be integrated into 
a health care system. For example, researchers at Yale University are investigating the 
effect of early resource education on pain management. The investigators in this study 
are enrolling veterans when they are seeking a disability classification for a pain condition 
and educating them on the different types of pain medications. In addition, they inform the 
veterans of the importance of treating both physical and psychological aspects of pain and 
connect the veterans with the services available to them. The researchers also assess their 
risk for substance use disorders and depression and refer the veterans to the appropriate 
treatment. If this intervention is successful, it can be quickly scaled up and made available 
nationwide to veterans seeking a disability classification. This early education and referral 
paradigm could also be adapted to other health care systems. 
NCCIH is leading the NIH HEAL (Helping to End Addiction Long-term SM) Initiative’s 
Pragmatic and Implementation Studies for the Management of Pain To Reduce Opioid 
Prescribing (PRISM) (https://heal.nih.gov/research/clinical-research/prism) program, w

--- PAGE 32 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
30
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025


--- PAGE 33 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
31
3OBJECTIVE
Foster Research on Health Promotion 
and Restoration, Resilience, Disease 
Prevention, and Symptom Management
NCCIH’s research investments in understanding the role of 
complementary and integrative health approaches in health 
promotion and restoration, resilience, disease prevention, 
and symptom management are in part informed by data on 
the complementary products and practices that people use. 
These data include what groups of people use them, why 
they use them, how their use has changed over time, and 
how their use relates to health outcomes. 
Complementary and integrative health care includes the patient–provider alliance, provider-
delivered interventions, and the patient taking ownership of the care. Survey data have 
revealed that people who use complementary and integrative approaches for wellness differ 
in significant ways from those who use them to treat an illness. For example, an analysis of 
National Health Interview Survey data showed that wellness-oriented users of complementary 
approaches were generally healthier, had a lower rate of conventional health services use, 
and had healthier behaviors overall, including greater physical activity and a lower likelihood 
of obesity, than those who used complementary approaches to treat illness. This suggests 
that access to and utilization of complementary and integrative approaches may empower 
patients to take charge of their health.
Surveys are only a first step in gaining knowledge about health-related behavior. More 
focused research is needed to understand why people make healthy, unhealthy, or risky 
choices; find out what choices people are making on a day-to-day basis, including self-
care; and elucidate the impact these choices may have on short- and long-term health. 
New technologies, such as wearables, have improved the ways in which data can be 
obtained to measure a variety of behaviors. Current studies can also harness state-of-the-
art technologies and approaches from the neurobiological, biomechanical, and biological 
sciences to elucidate biological effects and identify mechanisms of action of behaviors and 
interventions of interest. Researchers may also leverage existing databases to provide real-
world insights into health and health care.
Managing symptoms—particularly recurring or chronic symptoms such as anxiety, headache, 
insomnia, and back, neck, or joint pain—is challenging. Symptoms may change over time, 
and patients may experience multiple symptoms in clusters (e.g., pain, sleep difficulties, and 
mood changes) rather than a single symptom in isolation. Current approaches to symptom 
management often have limitations and often do not optimally engage patients in self-
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 34 matched=['OBJECTIVE 3', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
32
management. Despite medical treatment, some patients continue to experience troublesome 
levels of symptoms and a diminished quality of life. Moreover, medications used to treat 
symptoms may have significant risks and side effects.
Expanding the knowledge base about how complementary health approaches may improve 
symptom management in both the short and long term is a priority for NCCIH. There is 
a growing body of basic and clinical research on complementary health approaches for 
symptom management that employs the methods, tools, and technologies of neuroscience, 
psychoneuroimmunology, psychology, behavioral medicine, physical medicine, and 
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
OBJECTIVE 3   Foster Research on Health Promotion and Restoration,  
Resilience, Disease Prevention, and Symptom Management
Emotional Well-Being
In April 2018, NCCIH and the Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research  
(OBSSR), in collaboration with other NIH Institutes, Centers, and Offices (National 
Institute on Aging, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institute of Mental Health), 
sponsored a roundtable discussion with the following goals: (1) to gain a deeper insight  
into the existing research on the role of emotional well-being in health; (2) to advance 
research in this area and create a trans-NIH research program focused on developing, 
testing, and implementing intervention strategies to promote emotional well-being.  
(View the roundtable meeting report—Emotional Well-Being: Emerging Insights and 
Questions for Future Research [https://www.nccih.nih.gov/research/emotional-well-being-
emerging-insights-and-questions-for-future-research].)
The roundtable participants presented and discussed 10 models of success that produced 
better health outcomes through promotion of emotional resilience. They included cases 
in which a component of emotional well-being was identified as the intervention target, or 
a change in emotional well-being was found to be a mediator of a change in health. They 
also included interventions in which improvement of some aspect of emotional well-being 
itself was the desired outcome. Some examples of models of success include Cultivating 
Awareness and Resilience in Education (CARE) for teachers, active experiencing training 
for episodic memory recall, the Strong African American Families program (SAAF), and the 
Health Enhancement Program (HEP).
Through workshop presentations and discussion, research gaps and opportunities 
were noted that included needs to (1) increase the understanding of the fundamental 
constituents of well-being across the lifespan and among various subgroups, (2) refine and 
implement scientifically based prevention strategies to enhance emotional well-being, and 
(3) develop measurement methodologies to optimize and scale up well-being interventions 
for treatment and prevention of burnout, stress, pain, and mental health symptoms in at-risk 
populations (e.g., caregivers, military personnel, racial and ethnic minorities, individuals with 
substance abuse), as well as children and adolescents.
NCCIH is supporting the development of transdisciplinary research networks designed 
to advance research on emotional well-being in the social, behavioral, psychological, 
biological, and neurobiological sciences.
32

--- PAGE 36 matched=['OBJECTIVE 3', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
34
and mental health symptoms in at-risk populations (e.g., caregivers, military personnel, 
racial and ethnic minorities, individuals with substance abuse), as well as children and 
adolescents. The Center seeks to support research on complementary health approaches 
and how they can affect resilience and well-being across the continuum from basic and 
mechanistic studies to dissemination and implementation science. These efforts will build 
upon extant data involving mind and body practices such as mindfulness-based stress 
reduction or meditation. Future studies will help determine the value of complementary 
health approaches in enhancing cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and physical resilience 
and well-being in people who are subjected to stressful or adverse circumstances. NCCIH 
is also interested in the mechanisms of how natural products may work to increase 
resilience to psychological and environmental stressors, such as sleep disruption, pain, 
unhealthy diet, exposure to pathogens, or inflammation. There also is a need to understand 
mechanisms by which managing psychological stress and improving sleep may counteract 
pathological processes such as inflammation and restore healthier immune, endocrine, and 
metabolic responses. Similarly, the potential role of the microbiome in the development and 
maintenance of resilience is of interest to NCCIH.
2  
Investigate the safety and efficacy of complementary health  
approaches and integrative treatment strategies for health  
  promotion and restoration, resilience, disease prevention,  
   and symptom management in diverse populations and settings.  
NCCIH seeks to foster research to develop, test, and refine interventions and to  
adapt interventions to meet the needs of different populations, including those most 
vulnerable (e.g., disadvantaged children and youth—resulting from poverty or other 
adversities, rural populations, individuals with low socioeconomic status, and racial 
and ethnic minorities). The Center plans to foster research that examines the potential 
contributions of complementary approaches and integrative treatment strategies in 
promoting healthy behaviors, preventing disease, and restoring health across the  
lifespan. The use of complementary health approaches in the United States is mostly  
aimed at improving general health and well-being, but much of the research to date  
has focused on the application of these approaches to specific conditions or symptoms. 
Although scientific and operational challenges are significant, compelling opportunities  
exist to explore the potential role of complementary health approaches and integrative 
treatment strategies for health promotion and restoration, resilience, and disease 
prevention, as well as symptom management.
3  
Conduct rigorous clinical studies on the effectiveness,  
dissemination, and implementation of complementary  
  health approaches into health care.  
It is important that the lessons learned from NCCIH-supported research are relevant 
to inform and improve the quality of health, delivery of services, and utilization and 
sustainability of evidence-based tools and approaches. Research publications often do 
not lead to widespread uptake of evidence-based practices. There is a gap in the research 
pipeline to determine the best ways to improve adoption and implementation of evidence-
based approaches. Implementing complementary health treatments and practices into 
the conventional health 

--- PAGE 38 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
36
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 39 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
37
4OBJECTIVE
 
Enhance the Complementary and 
Integrative Health Research Workforce
Researchers from many different biomedical and  
behavioral disciplines are key to further advancing 
basic, mechanistic, translational, and clinical research in 
complementary approaches and their integration into health 
care. Over the years, NCCIH has targeted resources to 
attract well-trained and experienced scientists and clinicians 
into complementary and integrative health research, 
supporting their development as scientific leaders in the 
field. NCCIH will continue to promote strategies to enhance 
diversity of the workforce, enhance the clinician-scientist 
pathway at both the individual and institutional levels, and 
enhance the transition of Research Career Development (K) 
awardees to an independent research career. 
NCCIH supports research training and career development programs to increase  
the number and diversity of well-trained scientists to conduct rigorous complementary  
and integrative health research. We have special opportunities for individuals from groups 
who are underrepresented in scientific research (e.g., racial and ethnic minority populations) 
throughout the continuum from high school to faculty. In addition, we support workshops 
at NIH and at scientific conferences to help students and fellows connect to NIH funding 
opportunities, understand how to interact with NIH staff to develop research proposals, 
navigate the NIH peer review process successfully, develop resilience to overcome  
career roadblocks, and develop plans for a successful research career. We attend a wide 
variety of scientific conferences that include targeted outreach to societies with a focus on 
individuals from groups that are underrepresented in the biomedical, clinical, behavioral,  
and social sciences.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 40 matched=['OBJECTIVE 4', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
38
STRATEGIES
1  
Support research training and career development opportunities  
to increase the diversity and number of well-trained scientists  
  conducting rigorous, cutting-edge research on complementary  
  and integrative health practices.  
NCCIH supports a range of research training and career development programs aimed at 
increasing the number and diversity of well-prepared, skilled investigators with knowledge 
and expertise in both complementary and integrative health and state-of-the-art research 
methods. Because complementary and integrative health approaches include a wide 
variety of modalities, NCCIH’s training strategies must include innovative approaches that 
incorporate an understanding of this diversity to ensure that future research workforce 
needs for the various modalities as well as combinations of these modalities are met.
In particular, the Center will focus on:
—  Individuals from groups who are underrepresented in biomedical, clinical, or behavioral 
and social science research (e.g., racial and ethnic minorities or other populations 
described in the Notice of NIH’s Interest in Diversity [https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/
notice-files/NOT-OD-20-031.html]) and are interested in careers in complementary and 
integrative health research.
—  Clinician-scientists, including conventionally trained physicians, complementary health 
practitioners, and other professionals (e.g., clinical psychologists, nurses, physical 
therapists, occupational therapists, art and/or music therapists), especially those who are 
currently underrepresented in biomedical and behavioral scientific research.
—  Scientists trained in key biomedical and behavioral research disciplines necessary for 
rigorous, state-of-the-art scientific investigation of complementary and integrative health 
approaches, practices, and disciplines.
2  
Foster interdisciplinary collaborations and partnerships  
at individual and institutional levels.  
As science has advanced, the research enterprise has become increasingly 
interdisciplinary, requiring teams of investigators with different areas of expertise. Clinician-
scientists with both clinical and research expertise play an important role in advancing 
translational science and provide unique perspectives to biomedical research informed by 
patient care. However, the path toward becoming a clinician-scientist is not easy and may 
be particularly challenging for complementary and integrative health clinicians because of 
diverse credentialing standards and varying opportunities to engage in research prior to/
during clinical training.
At the individual level, NCCIH supports multiple interdisciplinary opportunities for training 
of clinician-scientists. For example, NCCIH has partnered with the National Center for 
Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) to provide a research career development 
pathway for complementary and integrative health clinician-scientists to join career 
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
OBJECTIVE 4   Enhance the Complementary and Integrative Health Research Workforce

--- PAGE 41 matched=['mission'] ---
39
development cohorts of other types of clinician-scientists and will continue to support this. 
To promote interdisciplinary collaborations at the institutional level, NCCIH is exploring 
models to support partnerships across different complementary and integrative institutions, 
disciplines, and systems with research-intensive institutions, with the goal of increasing 
the number of complementary and integrative clinicians included as collaborative partners 
in research projects. For example, we are discussing the creation of a virtual resource 
center (university without walls) to provide research support (e.g., networking, mentoring, 
conceptual grant development, central Institutional Review Board, statistical and research 
design) to investigators based at schools of acupuncture, chiropractic, osteopathy, 
naturopathy, physical therapy, and music and art therapy.
In addition to focusing on interdisciplinary collaborations to promote the clinician-scientist 
pathway, NCCIH encourages interdisciplinary training opportunities within our funded 
training and career development awards. We also support cross-training opportunities 
at the mid-career level to promote the development of interdisciplinary research teams. 
NCCIH will also foster interdisciplinary research collaborations between research-intensive 
institutions and institutions that have a historical mission or a demonstrated commitment to 
educating students from groups underrepresented in the biomedical research workforce. 
We will identify best practices to continually improve the quality of NCCIH workforce 
development activities.
Evidence-based approaches should be used by programs to monitor and improve the 
recruitment and training of complementary and integrative health scientists at all levels. 
NCCIH encourages funded research training and education programs to develop and 
evaluate their practices. To ensure maximum return on its research training investment, 
the Center encourages programs to disseminate training practices that have proven to be 
effective. We will perform regular evaluations of NCCIH-led training and career development 
activities using appropriate performance markers for each activity. 
NCCIH will focus on: 
— Identifying and addressing barriers to the creation of a highly skilled  
and diverse research workforce
— Piloting and evaluating new approaches for workforce development
— Exploring approaches to speed the trajectory from trainee status  
to independent researcher
Mapping a Pathway to Research on Whole Person Health

--- PAGE 42 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
40
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 43 matched=['scientific priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
41
5OBJECTIVE
Provide Objective, Evidence-Based 
Information on Complementary  
and Integrative Health Interventions
It is vital that the public, health care providers, researchers, 
and policymakers be informed and knowledgeable about 
the safety and effectiveness of complementary and 
integrative health interventions. They also should have 
access to information about NCCIH’s research results 
across the full continuum of the research pipeline, as well 
as ongoing research at the Center, including an awareness 
of whole person research, which examines the connections 
that exist across domains of human health. Access to 
information about NCCIH’s scientific priorities and funding 
initiatives is also important.
The challenges of translating and disseminating complex scientific information about 
complementary and integrative health interventions to an interested and engaged public 
are twofold. First, the landscape of complementary and integrative health is inundated with 
information and misinformation—some of it overtly promotional, and much of it either not 
based on evidence or of questionable quality and reliability. Second, there is evidence that 
individuals who use complementary health interventions often do not discuss their use with 
their conventional health care providers. Instead, they rely on other sources, including family 
and friends and information gleaned from the internet, other popular media, and advertising.
STRATEGIES
1  
Disseminate evidence-based information on complementary  
and integrative health interventions, as well as information about  
  ongoing research, including whole person research, that examines  
  the connections that exist across domains of human health.  
NCCIH will continue to ensure that its presentation of evidence-based information on 
complementary and integrative health interventions is scientifically objective, appropriately 
balances what is known and not known about their safety and effectiveness, and provides 
context in the landscape of conventional treatment approaches.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 44 matched=['OBJECTIVE 5', 'Strategic Plan', 'vision'] ---
42
2  
Continue to develop methods and approaches to enhance public 
understanding of basic scientific concepts and biomedical research.  
NCCIH must continue to develop methods and approaches to enhance the public’s 
understanding of basic scientific concepts and biomedical research to lay a foundation 
of knowledge for the better understanding of information and improved decision making. 
Importantly, NCCIH must provide information that is engaging, accessible, and of value 
to the public, health care providers, researchers, and policymakers, given the flood of 
information and misinformation in the public domain and the frequent self-care use of 
complementary health interventions.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
OBJECTIVE 5   Provide Objective, Evidence-Based Information  
on Complementary and Integrative Health Interventions
The Impact of Long-Term Scientific Investments
Scientific research is a long-term investment with the goal of improving public health and 
health care. Over the last 20 years, NCCIH has invested in numerous clinical trials, which 
were built upon countless previous scientific investigations. Here we look back at a few of 
these trials and evaluate the impacts of those investments.
The AREDS trials:  The Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) began in 1992, before 
NCCIH was created. This clinical trial was sponsored by the National Eye Institute (NEI) and 
sought to evaluate the effects of a nutritional supplement, called the AREDS formulation, on 
the progression of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). AMD is one the leading causes 
of visual impairment and blindness in the United States. The results from this study were 
published in 2001 and showed that the AREDS formulation significantly reduced the risk of 
advanced AMD and its associated vision loss. These results were exciting and represented 
the first intervention shown to reduce the risk of advanced AMD. The AREDS formulation 
contains high doses of vitamin C, vitamin E, beta-carotene, and zinc, and while it was 
shown to be effective there were concerns about the high concentration of beta-carotene. 
Other studies completed while AREDS was in progress showed that high concentrations 
of beta-carotene were associated with an increased risk of lung cancer in smokers. So 
in 2006, a second clinical trial, called AREDS2, was launched to determine if the AREDS 
formulation could still be effective if beta-carotene was removed. NCCIH contributed 
approximately $1.5 million to this study. The effort was led by NEI and received additional 
funds from other NIH Institutes. In the AREDS2 trial, the antioxidants lutein and zeaxanthin, 
which are in the same family of nutrients as beta-carotene, were added to the AREDS 
formulation as a substitute for beta-carotene. The study found that lutein and zeaxanthin 
together appeared to be a safe and effective alternative to beta-carotene. The scientific 
investments made in the AREDS trials helped identify nutritional supplements that reduced 
the risk of developing advanced stages of AMD by about 25 percent and the risk of central 
vision loss by 19 percent in people with high risk of developing the disease. The AREDS 
and AREDS2 formulations have undergone phase 3 clinical trials and are available over the 
counter in the United States.
 
42

--- PAGE 46 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
44
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 47 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
45
 
Serving as an Efficient and Effective 
Steward of Public Resources
Improving Women’s Health and Minority Health,  
and Eliminating Health Disparities
Women and underserved groups, including racial and ethnic minorities and sexual and 
gender minorities, have distinct health needs and often experience disparities in health 
outcomes. Individuals with low socioeconomic status, or who live in rural communities, 
also often experience such disparities. NCCIH maintains that women, racial and ethnic 
minorities, rural populations, low-income populations, sexual and gender minorities, and 
other populations experiencing health disparities should be included in all relevant research, 
such that there is sufficient representation of each population to conduct relevant analyses. 
Inclusivity in research generates more broadly applicable information and improves scientific 
understanding of the health and well-being of specific population groups.
NCCIH is committed to funding research with diverse populations and promoting a diverse 
scientific workforce. We support training, career development, and research opportunities 
directed at minority health and health disparities. 
Health Disparities Research
NCCIH seeks to expand the research we support involving understudied, underrepresented, 
and underreported populations. We participate in initiatives targeted toward these populations 
and are currently supporting research to explore the development, feasibility, optimization, 
and efficacy of complementary and integrative health interventions within health disparity 
populations. NIH-designated health disparity populations include racial and ethnic minorities 
(Blacks/African Americans, Hispanics/Latinos, American Indians/Alaska Natives, Asian 
Americans, and Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders), sexual and gender minorities, 
socioeconomically disadvantaged populations, and underserved rural populations. Other 
vulnerable populations of interest to NCCIH include pregnant and lactating women; homeless 
youth; children with disabilities; children who have experienced abuse; veterans; military 
personnel; and military families. In addition, we encourage research in these populations 
through outreach activities. For example, NCCIH cosponsored the NIH 2019 Traditional 
Medicine Summit with the NIH Tribal Health Research Office. The goals of this summit were 
to identify approaches to respectful collaboration between traditional medicine practitioners 
and health researchers; explore the relationships between traditional medicine and health 
care services; and connect younger generations of American Indian/Alaska Native people to 
traditional medicine, integrative health research, and academic research. We plan to continue 
expanding these efforts.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 48 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
46
Specifically, NCCIH will:
— Support community-engaged research on the efficacy and effectiveness of 
complementary and integrative health approaches for improving minority health and 
eliminating disparities in mental, emotional, and behavioral health, obesity, and pain. 
— Promote research on the use of complementary and integrative health approaches 
for health promotion and restoration, resilience, disease prevention, and symptom 
management to address the role of social and structural determinants of health. 
— Conduct research to test implementation strategies aimed at improving uptake, scale-up, 
and sustainability of evidence-based interventions among health disparity populations 
and in low-resource settings.
— Foster research collaborations between research-intensive institutions and institutions 
that have a historical mission or a demonstrated commitment to educating students from 
groups underrepresented in the biomedical research workforce.
— Facilitate research collaborations among health disparities researchers and 
complementary and integrative health researchers.
— Partner with other NIH Institutes, Centers, and Offices to support interventions that 
address multiple levels of influence (e.g., individual, community, societal) on health 
outcomes and target co-occurring conditions among underserved populations.
— Serve as a catalyst in the dissemination of innovative and evidence-based health 
disparities research and scientific opportunities to our stakeholders.
Women’s Health Research
Signed into law on December 13, 2016, the 21st Century Cures Act (Public Law No. 114-255) 
reaffirms NIH’s commitment to women’s health. Specifically, the Act endorses the importance 
of including women in clinical research and considering sex as a biological variable in 
research using humans and nonhuman vertebrate animals. Further, the Act requires that 
people of all ages be represented in clinical research, expands sex- and gender-based 
and race- and ethnicity-based results reporting requirements for phase 3 clinical trials, and 
incorporates changes to encourage research collaboration among NIH Institutes, Centers, 
and Offices, with the goal of improving the health of all people (https://www.nih.gov/research-
training/medical-research-initiatives/cures).
The 2017 National Health Interview Survey showed that women were more than twice as 
likely to use yoga compared with men (19.8 percent versus 8.6 percent). Women were 
also more likely than men to use meditation (16.3 percent versus 11.8 percent) and see a 
chiropractor (11.1 percent versus 9.4 percent). Women may also use natural products to 
improve their health during their lifespan, including during pregnancy and lactation.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Serving as an Efficient and Effective Steward of Public Resources

--- PAGE 50 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
48
NCCIH has also made pain management a major emphasis in its research efforts. Pain 
is a major public health problem and is the most common reason why Americans use 
complementary and integrative health practices. Data from the 2012 National Health Interview 
Survey estimated that 126.1 million adults reported some pain in the previous 3 months, 
with 25.3 million adults (11.2 percent) suffering from daily (chronic) pain and 23.4 million 
(10.3 percent) reporting a lot of pain. Conventional care often fails to manage chronic pain 
effectively, and other approaches to relieve or reduce pain and increase functional ability are 
needed. Research studies have shown that some complementary health modalities may 
reduce pain associated with some chronic conditions: examples include massage, spinal 
manipulation, and yoga for chronic back pain, and tai chi for fibromyalgia pain.
Scientific Plausibility and Rigor
NCCIH strives to invest in research that will drive new discoveries and focuses on areas that 
will have the greatest impact by prioritizing research topics that show scientific opportunity 
and promise and are amenable to rigorous scientific inquiry. No matter how interesting an 
approach may be, if the evidence favoring it is too limited to support the scope and direction 
of a proposed study, or if reliable, rigorous methods of measurement do not exist, that topic is 
not suitable for a full-scale investigation.
As a responsible steward of its publicly provided resources, NCCIH is highly selective 
in the choice of topics for major clinical trials. Decisions about which large-scale trials 
to support must be based on the strength, reliability, and reproducibility of signals from 
clinical experience and preliminary, smaller pilot studies, as well as on evidence of scientific 
plausibility obtained from mechanistic studies. Adequate methods and tools to measure 
clinical outcomes accurately and effectively are equally important to sound research design. 
Objective, validated measurement tools are essential, and so are processes and procedures 
to ensure quality control, whether the intervention is physical, psychological, nutritional, or a 
combination. For example, NCCIH has developed a strict natural product integrity policy to 
ensure that natural products used in research supported by the Center are fully identified, 
characterized, and standardized.
Priority Setting Framework
NCCIH is committed to funding research in areas that will have an impact on health and 
health care. When considering funding a potential research project, the Center assesses 
whether it is reasonably likely that the results of the research could lead to changes in 
the health practices of individuals or health care providers or in the decisions of health 
policymakers. The Center also considers whether the research addresses an important 
public health concern or need for scientific information regarding the mechanism of action, 
safety, efficacy, or effectiveness of complementary and integrative health approaches.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Serving as an Efficient and Effective Steward of Public Resources

--- PAGE 51 matched=['mission'] ---
49
Research Partnerships
To fulfill its mission and leverage its research investments, NCCIH collaborates with other 
NIH Institutes, Centers, and Offices; other Federal agencies; professional societies; patient 
advocacy groups; and organizations with an interest in furthering our understanding of 
complementary approaches and their integration into health care with the goal of improving 
health. Through these collaborations, NCCIH enhances its research portfolio, expands its 
multidisciplinary expertise, and incorporates a broader understanding of the health needs and 
perspectives of the community.
Mapping a Pathway to Research on Whole Person Health
Priority Setting
1. Scientific Promise
— Does a reasonable body of evidence support the potential of the 
proposed research to lead to improved (1) options or strategies to treat 
health conditions or symptoms or (2) approaches to promote disease 
prevention, health promotion, resilience, or health restoration?
— Is evidence sufficient to support the scope and directions of the proposed 
research? If not, what research is needed to establish such evidence?
2. Amenability to Rigorous Scientific Inquiry
— Are the key research goals achievable, and are the key research questions 
amenable to rigorous scientific investigation, given needed and available 
methods for measurement, translational tools, and technologies?
—  Are potential approaches feasible and scientifically plausible? Do they  
lend themselves to rigorous quality control? If not, does the proposed 
research focus appropriately on developing needed methods, tools,  
and technologies?
3. Potential to Change Health Practices
— Is it reasonably likely that the results of the research or program could  
lead to changes in the health practices of individuals or health care 
providers or in the decisions of health policymakers?
4. Relationship to Use and Practice
—  Does the proposed project address an important public health concern 
or scientific information need regarding the fundamental mechanism, 
efficacy, safety, or public use of complementary health approaches?

--- PAGE 52 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
50
NCCIH Partnership With SAMHSA  
To Combat Opioid Use Disorder 
More than 4 million people in the United States report using opioids for nonmedical 
purposes in the past month, and almost 2 million report symptoms consistent with an 
opioid use disorder (OUD). Fewer than half of those with an OUD receive treatment and 
even fewer receive treatment of adequate duration. The number of drug overdose deaths 
involving opioids has quadrupled between 1999 and 2015, to more than 33,000 annually.
Chronic pain is an important comorbidity in patients with OUD. Twenty to 30 percent 
of U.S. adults report chronic pain. Treatment of acute and chronic pain conditions with 
opioids is contributing to the OUD epidemic. Patients at increased risk of developing OUD 
are those with pain that is inadequately controlled, those exposed to opioids during acute 
pain episodes, and/or those with chronic pain and a history of substance abuse. Among 
patients with OUD treatment and chronic pain, barriers to actively engaging in treatment 
include fear of inadequately treated pain and depression. Many behavioral interventions 
have shown value for management of chronic pain. Recent American College of Physicians 
guidelines for management of chronic low-back pain include recommendations to consider 
interventions including mindfulness-based stress reduction, multidisciplinary rehabilitation, 
tai chi, yoga, progressive relaxation, operant therapy, and cognitive behavioral therapy. 
However, there are relatively few studies evaluating their effectiveness for the comorbidity of 
OUD and chronic pain. In addition, despite the proven effectiveness of medication-assisted 
treatment (MAT) for OUD, approximately 50 percent of people who begin methadone 
maintenance therapy, for example, discontinue within 12 months, and 50 percent of people 
retained have an opioid relapse within 6 months. Research also suggests that pain, which 
is highly prevalent, may be an important contributor to MAT dropout, opioid relapse, and 
opioid overdose.
NCCIH has partnered with the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 
(SAMHSA) to study the impact of behavioral interventions for primary or secondary 
prevention of OUD, or as a complement to MAT of OUD. Researchers are examining 
whether select behavioral interventions such as mindfulness meditation, cognitive behavioral 
therapy, or multidisciplinary rehabilitation improve adherence to and retention in MAT or 
reduce resumption of drug use in individuals with OUD. NCCIH has awarded six research 
grants, totaling $9.4 million over 3 years. In addition to support from NCCIH, funding for 
these awards will come from HEAL. The NCCIH-administered grants will support research 
around the treatment supported by the $1 billion SAMHSA State Targeted Response (STR) 
to the Opioid Crisis Grants initiative, also known as Opioid STR grants.
As part of the 21st Century Cures Act, Opioid STR grants have been distributed to all 50 
U.S. states, U.S. territories, and free-associated states to expand access to evidence-
based prevention, treatment, and recovery support services; reduce unmet treatment 
needs; and help prevent opioid overdose death. The six research awards supported by 
NCCIH will examine the impact of behavioral and complementary health interventions within 
the context of states’ plans for use of Opioid STR grant funds. As such, each of the funded 
research projects includes relevant state agency staff to ensure adeq

--- PAGE 55 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
53
 
 
Top Scientific Priorities
Research on Whole Person Health
Interoception Research
Health Restoration, Resilience, Disease Prevention,  
and Health Promotion Across the Lifespan
Implementation Science for  
Complementary and Integrative Health
Complementary and Integrative Management of Pain 
Complex Interactions Involving Nutritional Interventions
Enhancing the Complementary and Integrative  
Health Research Workforce
Mechanisms and Biomarkers of Mind and  
Body Approaches
Supporting Impactful Clinical Trials of Complementary  
and Integrative Health Approaches
Communications Strategies and Tools To Enhance Scientific 
Literacy and Understanding of Clinical Research
53
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025

--- PAGE 56 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
54
Research on Whole Person Health
Introduction and Explanation of Need
Complementary health approaches include a broad range of practices and interventions 
that may have originated outside of conventional medical care. Complementary 
approaches can be classified by their primary therapeutic input, which may be nutritional 
(e.g., special diets, dietary supplements, botanicals, probiotics, and microbial-based 
therapies), psychological (e.g., meditation, hypnosis, music therapies, relaxation therapies), 
physical (e.g., acupuncture, massage, manual therapies, devices related to these 
approaches), a combination of psychological and physical (e.g., yoga, tai chi, dance 
therapies, some forms of art therapies), or a combination of nutritional, psychological, and 
physical (e.g., Ayurveda, naturopathy, traditional Chinese medicine). The term integrative 
health care refers to conventional and complementary approaches used together in a 
coordinated way. Research on whole person health in the complementary and integrative 
spheres emphasizes research on multicomponent interventions that aim to improve health 
in multiple interconnected domains: biological (including multiple organs and systems), 
behavioral, social, and environmental. 
As a relatively new concept, research on whole person health is different from reduction-
based research, which mostly focuses on a single intervention’s impact on one or at 
most a few physiological systems as separate processes. Understanding how multiple 
physiological systems interconnect and interact is one of the key challenges for the success 
of research on whole person health. Complementary and integrative health approaches 
often are multicomponent interventions or engage multiple therapeutic systems. Their 
complexity and heterogeneity may require innovative study designs to fully investigate their 
fundamental science and therapeutic effects. Furthermore, sophisticated analytic tools 
and methods may need to be developed to encompass the double complexity of multiple 
system outcomes and their relationships with multicomponent interventions.
What Does Success Look Like?
—  Expanded research investigating the interaction of multiple physiological systems.
— New methodologies to study multicomponent interventions in an integrative approach or 
systems science approach.
— New research methods, approaches, and resources to enable integration of 
multicomponent therapies with multisystem outcomes.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Top Scientific Priorities

--- PAGE 58 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
56
Interoception Research
Introduction and Explanation of Need
Interoception refers to the representation of the internal world of an organism and includes 
the processes by which the organism senses, interprets, integrates, and regulates 
signals from within itself. Here, the action of “sensing” denotes communication from other 
physiological systems to the central nervous system (CNS) through the commonly called 
ascending pathways, while the action of “regulating” refers to communication from the brain 
to other physiological systems via descending pathways. The CNS, especially the brain, is 
primarily responsible for interpreting and integrating these signals into a representation of 
the internal world. It is important to clarify that the bidirectional communications between 
other physiological systems and the CNS can be carried through either the peripheral 
neural pathways or nonneuronal pathways, such as the vascular or lymphatic systems 
and humoral system (e.g., immune and endocrine). Processes involved in interoception 
could often serve as therapeutic targets of many complementary and integrative health 
approaches, including psychological and physical approaches such as meditation, 
acupuncture, and other manual therapies, as well as nutritional approaches such as  
natural products.  
Because of its potential importance, research on interoception in the context of 
complementary and integrative health approaches requires a deeper understanding of the 
connections between brain and body. In addition, tools and methods to probe interoceptive 
processes, especially in human subject research, are largely limited to self-reports and a 
handful of measures such as heart rate variability and skin conductance. An expansion of 
innovative and quantitative methods to study interoception may significantly enhance our 
understanding of how interoception works. These new tools and methods may also provide 
novel insights into how complementary and integrative health approaches may modulate 
the interoceptive processes and interoceptive clinical outcomes.
What Does Success Look Like?
—  Expanded understanding of the mechanisms underlying interoception.
—  Improved, innovative tools and methods to probe interoceptive processes, especially in 
human subjects.
—  Increased understanding of the impact of specific complementary and integrative health 
approaches on interoceptive processes. 
—  Improved understanding of the efficacy and effectiveness of complementary and 
integrative health approaches on interoception-related clinical outcomes, especially those 
related to musculoskeletal and visceral pain.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Top Scientific Priorities

--- PAGE 60 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
58
Health Restoration, Resilience, Disease Prevention,  
and Health Promotion Across the Lifespan
Introduction and Explanation of Need
There continues to be a growing interest in the use of complementary and integrative 
health approaches for preventing the onset of mental, emotional, and behavioral disorders, 
promoting psychological and physical health and well-being, and enhancing cognitive, 
emotional, and behavioral resilience in people who have experienced stressful or adverse 
life events. However, there has been limited research to examine the usefulness of these 
approaches as strategies for early intervention among individuals at increased risk for the 
purpose of preventing disease progression and supporting health restoration. Research has 
demonstrated the feasibility of conducting interventions that incorporate complementary 
and integrative health approaches, especially meditative approaches, for health promotion 
and disease prevention, particularly among adult populations. Additional research is 
needed to evaluate the feasibility of a wider range of interventions (e.g., music, guided 
imagery, qi gong, massage, dietary interventions), including multicomponent interventions 
(e.g., spinal manipulation combined with meditation), across the full lifespan and in diverse 
populations and settings. 
The evidence base for the efficacy and effectiveness of complementary and integrative 
approaches in the context of prevention, health promotion, resilience, and health restoration 
is limited and primarily includes studies of single systems at the individual level. NCCIH-
funded studies have shown efficacy primarily for mindfulness-based stress reduction for 
improving factors related to many physical and mental health conditions in adults, including 
indices of immune, endocrine, metabolic, and neurological function. 
Rigorously designed, developmentally appropriate studies are needed to determine 
the efficacy and effectiveness of a wider array of complementary and integrative health 
approaches that include a focus on multiple systems to support whole person health 
and that address multiple levels of influence (e.g., interpersonal, community, societal) on 
health outcomes. It is also essential to gain a better understanding of mechanisms related 
to resilience and health restoration in response to these interventions and to determine 
what works, for whom, and under what conditions. In fact, there is a fundamental lack of 
translational research on the mechanisms of resilience and health restoration in humans. 
In particular, the mechanisms of physical, psychological, and nutritional interventions 
in restoring health after an acute illness, or reversing the course of a chronic one, is 
an understudied area that needs a multisystem approach to identify mechanisms and 
predictive biomarkers that could be used to optimize and predict the beneficial effects 
of the interventions. NCCIH therefore seeks to support research that could expand the 
mechanistic and evidence base on complementary health approaches for preventing 
mental, emotional, and behavioral disorders and for promoting psychological and physical 
health, resilience, and health restoration.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Top Scientific Priorities

--- PAGE 62 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
60
Prenatal Through Young Adulthood
—  Develop and test theory-based early interventions for adolescents and young adults at 
high risk for adverse health outcomes to slow progression of disease, support health 
restoration, and improve resilience. 
—  Develop and test complementary and integrative prevention approaches that include the 
adults most influential in children’s lives (e.g., parents, teachers, and other caregivers), 
with the goal of improving development and well-being of children.
—  Test implementation strategies for improving uptake, scale-up, and sustainability of 
evidence-based interventions for promoting mental, emotional, and behavioral health 
among children and adolescents in diverse settings.
—  Conduct innovative mechanistic studies and identify predictive biomarkers underlying the 
effects of multicomponent interventions across multiple systems for health promotion, 
restoration, resilience, and disease prevention in adolescents and young adults.
Older Populations
—  Develop and test nutritional, psychological, and physical interventions focused on older 
populations,6 including the general population and those at increased risk for depression, 
anxiety, and other mental health disorders.
—  Perform impactful basic and translational research on the mechanisms of 
multicomponent interventions in promoting healthy aging, health restoration, resilience, 
and disease prevention in older populations.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Top Scientific Priorities
6 NIH defines an older adult as an individual 65 years of age or older.

--- PAGE 64 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
62
Priorities
—  Develop a robust portfolio of implementation science research for dietary, psychological, 
and physical complementary interventions.
—  Examine potential differences in the use of implementation science frameworks 
(Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research [CFIR], Reach Effectiveness 
Adoption Implementation [Re-AIM], alone or in combination) for nutritional, psychological, 
and physical complementary interventions.
—  Conduct research on the adaptation of implementation science frameworks to increase 
the use and reach of evidence-based complementary and integrative health interventions 
in multiple settings (schools, communities, health care, mobile health [mHealth]).
—  Develop a balanced portfolio of implementation science and effectiveness—
implementation hybrid designs that combine elements of clinical effectiveness and 
implementation research (i.e., hybrid type I, II, and III trials) of complementary and 
integrative health interventions where there is enough evidence and for which multiple 
independent research studies have been conducted. Investigators are encouraged to 
use the NCCIH clinical research framework. (see page 23) 
—  When appropriate, promote the use of innovative study designs (randomized cluster 
trials, stepped-wedge designs, pragmatic trials) in implementation science and hybrid 
effectiveness trials for complementary and integrative health interventions.
—  Increase implementation science studies that address disparities and evaluate strategies 
that make evidence-based complementary health interventions, including mHealth, 
available to health disparity and other vulnerable populations. 
—  Conduct research focused on tools and methods development specific for 
implementation science on complementary and integrative health approaches. 
—  Increase NCCIH training and career development opportunities in implementation 
science for complementary and integrative health researchers. 
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Top Scientific Priorities

--- PAGE 65 matched=['strategic plan'] ---
63
Complementary and Integrative Management of Pain 
Introduction and Explanation of Need
Chronic pain is the condition for which adults in the United States most often use 
complementary and integrative health approaches. Under normal circumstances, pain is 
an important physiological response that serves as a warning of actual or potential tissue 
damage. Chronic pain can indicate ongoing tissue damage, such as inflammation, or can 
persist due to central nervous system sensitization resulting from increased neuronal and 
circuit activation in nociceptive pathways even after the tissue has healed. As a chronic 
syndrome, pain adversely affects function and psychological and social well-being. Pain 
is most often treated with pharmacologic and/or surgical interventions. However, these 
treatments are often associated with adverse outcomes, including tissue damage following 
surgery and harmful side effects associated with pharmacologic treatment, such as risk of 
misuse and addiction, particularly in the case of treatment with opioids. Complementary 
and integrative health approaches to pain management may offer safer, more effective, and 
cost-efficient options.
NCCIH has focused on research related to chronic pain since the publication of its last 
strategic plan in 2016. Several programs have been initiated and led by NCCIH alone (e.g., 
the Exploring the Mechanisms Underlying Analgesic Properties of Minor Cannabinoids 
and Terpenes program) or in collaboration with other NIH Institutes and Centers (e.g., the 
Trans-NIH Natural Products and Pain Working Group). NCCIH also participates in large 
trans-NIH and trans-agency pain initiatives, such as the NIH-DoD-VA Pain Management 
Collaboratory and HEAL, the latter of which aims to help stem the national opioid public 
health crisis by evaluating innovative therapies for pain management and improving 
treatment for opioid misuse and addiction. Although research evaluating the impact of 
complementary and integrative approaches on pain remains a priority for NCCIH, a deeper 
understanding of the mechanisms by which complementary approaches exert their effects 
and identification of therapeutic biomarkers are needed to optimize treatments and to 
predict those individuals or groups most likely to respond to specific treatments. Rigorous 
basic, mechanistic, translational, clinical efficacy, and implementation research is needed 
before complementary health approaches for pain management can become an integral 
component of standard care. 
Mapping a Pathway to Research on Whole Person Health

--- PAGE 66 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
64
What Does Success Look Like?
—  Advanced understanding of multisystem pain mechanisms and phenotypes (e.g., 
myofascial pain) and common comorbidities.
—  Elucidation of mechanisms underlying overlapping pain conditions. 
—  Increased focus on health disparities in pain and greater inclusion of women, racial and 
ethnic minorities, and underserved populations in clinical trials/studies on pain.
—  Expanded evidence base on the efficacy and effectiveness of complementary and 
integrative approaches for pain management.
—  Increased understanding of the multisystem mechanisms underlying the effects of 
complementary and integrative approaches on pain.
—  Leveraging HEAL and other trans-NIH and trans-agency programs to identify therapeutic 
biomarkers for complementary and integrative health approaches on pain. 
—  Improved methods for incorporating effective complementary and integrative approaches 
into standard care to treat pain and decrease the unnecessary use of opioids.
Priorities
Basic and Mechanistic Research
— Expand preclinical research elucidating the mechanisms of physical and/or psychological 
interventions for pain.
— Explore peripheral tissue mechanisms underlying the impact of complementary and 
integrative health approaches on acute and/or chronic pain management.
— Conduct research to elucidate the myofascial components of chronic pain as potential 
targets for complementary and integrative health interventions, such as force-based 
interventions (e.g., manual and movement-based therapies). 
— Conduct basic research to elucidate mechanisms underlying musculoskeletal pain.
— Identify novel, nonaddictive dietary supplement candidates to manage pain. 
— Conduct basic research to elucidate the biological mechanisms that underlie the 
analgesic properties of natural products and their derivatives.
— Develop an understanding of how complementary health approaches impact multiple 
biological systems that may be involved in chronic pain conditions (e.g., brain-gut-
microbiome, myofascial tissue—brain).
— Study behavioral, psychological, social, and physiological mechanisms underlying 
complementary and integrative health interventions for pain management in specific 
populations, including underserved populations and those underrepresented in research 
(e.g., people with sickle cell disease pain, children, older adults, women, military 
personnel/veterans).
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Top Scientific Priorities

--- PAGE 68 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
66
Complex Interactions Involving Nutritional Interventions
Introduction and Explanation of Need
Nutritional interventions have millennia of history as therapeutic agents. They commonly 
include the phytochemicals found in fruits and vegetables, fermented foods containing 
probiotic cultures, other natural products, and traditional medicine practices that rely heavily 
on plants. In all cases, the interventions are delivered as complex mixtures and are thought 
to act across multiple biological systems. Despite this, there is relatively little research 
on the use of complex mixtures for their health-promoting effects or on the study of how 
natural products impact multiple biological systems. In part, this is due to the difficulty in 
systematically studying the complexity of multicomponent and multisystem interactions. 
Despite the advances in all areas of medicine, scientists still struggle to rigorously study 
complex multisystem interactions.
Given the difficulty of assessing complex interactions with current approaches, innovative 
strategies are needed to further elucidate how nutritional interventions, whether in the 
form of botanicals, probiotics, or dietary constituents, may have health benefits. The 
potential benefits of these complex interactions could manifest themselves in multiple ways. 
This includes multiple components of a dietary intervention acting on a single biological 
system (e.g., nervous or digestive), a single component acting on multiple systems (e.g., 
omega-3 fatty acids), or multiple components acting on multiple systems (e.g., traditional 
herbal medicine, probiotics). It also includes the possibility that these complex interactions 
produce more than additive (i.e., synergistic) effects. Cocktail approaches are used 
increasingly in modern medicine, as evidenced by current approaches in chemotherapy 
and antiretroviral and antimicrobial regimens. While the principle of complex interactions 
and synergy is mentioned often to justify research on natural products, rigorous efforts 
to quantify these multicomponent and multisystem activities in nutritional interventions is 
lacking. Classic pharmaceutical development seeks to identify a single active compound 
that acts at a single target site. This has been a very successful endeavor, as evidenced 
by the high percentage of pharmaceuticals derived from natural products, but it might 
not readily apply to the study of multisystem and multicomponent interactions involving 
nutritional interventions. Thus, a deeper understanding of the systems-level interactions 
of natural products with human biology, including the microbiome, is needed to answer 
fundamental questions regarding their health-promoting effects.
What Does Success Look Like?
—  NCCIH supports a robust portfolio of research focused on the study of nutritional 
interventions, including individual plants/probiotics as well as multibotanical and 
multistrain formulas, and their potentially synergistic interactions with single or multiple 
biological systems. 
—  Enhanced multisystem research approaches that tie together various cellular, gut 
microbial, and genetic contributors to health restoration and disease prevention. 
—  Substantial development or application of cutting-edge multidisciplinary approaches, 
including bioinformatic and data sciences, to uncover contributions from multiple 
constituents that may produce subtle changes individually yet yield outsized benefits 
across multiple bio

--- PAGE 70 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
68
—  Develop and validate in vitro and/or in vivo models capable of simultaneously assessing 
multiple biological systems. 
—  Develop and validate innovative systems biology models incorporating diverse 
phytochemical inputs and their interaction with multiple biological systems.
Low-Priority Topics
—  Studies on combinations of macronutrients (fats, carbohydrates, proteins) for their 
nutritional effects.
—  Studies on vitamins, minerals, or amino acids individually or in combination for their 
nutritional effects or to address nutritional deficiencies.
—  Broad epidemiological studies of correlations between dietary patterns and health 
outcomes.
—  Research in humans using dietary constituents individually or in combination for 
treatment or prevention of chronic disease conditions specifically within the mission of 
other NIH Institutes and Centers (e.g., cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular disease).
—  Studies on mechanisms already well established or known for a natural product or a 
category of natural products.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Top Scientific Priorities

--- PAGE 71 matched=['Objective 4', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
69
Enhancing the Complementary and  
Integrative Health Research Workforce
Introduction and Explanation of Need
NCCIH is committed to training researchers with the expertise needed to conduct 
successful basic, mechanistic, translational, clinical, and implementation studies on 
complementary and integrative health approaches. Researchers from many different 
scientific disciplines possess critical knowledge and technologies required for in-depth 
investigation of the basic biological, physiological, and clinical effects and safety of 
complementary health approaches and their integration into conventional medicine. As 
detailed on our training webpage (https://www.nccih.nih.gov/training), NCCIH supports 
a range of research training and career development programs aimed at increasing the 
number and diversity of well-prepared, skilled investigators with knowledge and expertise 
in both complementary and integrative health interventions and state-of-the-art research 
methods. The 2021–2025 NCCIH Strategic Plan includes Objective 4: Enhance the 
Complementary and Integrative Health Research Workforce, with two primary strategies:
1 Support research training and career development opportunities to increase the diversity 
and number of well-trained scientists conducting rigorous, cutting-edge research on 
complementary and integrative health practices.
2 Foster interdisciplinary collaborations and partnerships at individual and  
institutional levels.
NCCIH supports training and career development of investigators pursuing research topics 
that are well aligned with our scientific strategic objectives. We seek to support trainees 
across career stages pursuing basic, mechanistic, translational, and clinical science on 
natural products, mind and body practices, and/or multicomponent approaches. We are 
particularly committed to the development of a complementary and integrative health 
research workforce that is representative of the diversity in American society, in support of 
NIH’s Interest in Diversity (https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-20-031.
html). In addition to enhancing the diversity of our research workforce, the Center is also 
focused on supporting career development of clinician-scientists, including conventionally 
trained physicians, complementary health practitioners, and other health care professionals 
(e.g., clinical psychologists, nurses) who are interested in complementary and integrative 
health research. This includes both individual-level training for clinician-scientists and 
fostering institutional-level interdisciplinary partnerships to facilitate cross-training and 
interdisciplinary research teams. We also seek to promote the success of NCCIH-funded 
trainees as they progress to the next steps of their scientific careers and to identify best 
practices to continually improve our training and career development portfolio.
Mapping a Pathway to Research on Whole Person Health

--- PAGE 72 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
70
What Does Success Look Like?
—  Increased diversity of researchers engaging in complementary and integrative health 
research to enhance participation of individuals from groups that are underrepresented 
in the biomedical, clinical, behavioral, and social sciences, as described in the Notice 
of NIH’s Interest in Diversity (https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-
OD-20-031.html). 
—  An expansion of clinician-scientists in the NCCIH training and career development 
portfolio representing a diverse range of clinical training expertise.
—  Support of institutional-level interdisciplinary collaborations that support cross-training 
and development of interdisciplinary teams focused on complementary and integrative 
health research.
—  An improved career pipeline that produces more NCCIH-funded trainees, fellows, and 
early career development awardees who successfully compete for subsequent NIH or 
other Federally funded research awards.
—  The NCCIH training and career development portfolio spans all career stages of basic, 
mechanistic, translational, and clinical science, as well as research training in natural 
products, mind and body practices, and/or multicomponent approaches.
—  NCCIH evaluates its training and career development activities and retools any 
underperforming activities.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Top Scientific Priorities

--- PAGE 74 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
72
Mechanisms and Biomarkers  
of Mind and Body Approaches 
Introduction and Explanation of Need
Complementary and integrative health approaches include a broad range of practices and 
interventions that may have originated outside of conventional medicine and are gradually 
being integrated into mainstream health care. These approaches can be classified by 
their primary therapeutic input, which may be nutritional, psychological, and/or physical. 
Psychological and/or physical approaches encompass what have been commonly 
considered mind and body approaches. Commonly used psychological approaches 
include meditation and cognitive behavioral therapy, while physical approaches include 
acupuncture, other manual therapies (soft tissue manipulation, massage, spinal and joint 
manipulation, and related devices), and physical exercise. Some approaches, such as yoga 
and tai chi, comprise both psychological and physical components. Psychological and/or 
physical approaches have been generally used by the public to treat or manage disorders 
and symptoms such as pain, sleep disturbance, stress, and anxiety, as well as to support 
general health. 
The majority of the mechanistic studies of psychological and physical approaches focus 
on the neural system (human adult) and psychological and social systems, while other 
physiological systems, organs, and tissues (e.g., immune, microbial, cardiovascular, 
musculoskeletal, endocrine, respiratory, metabolic, digestive, reproductive) remain 
understudied. Similarly, mechanistic studies involving combined multicomponent 
approaches (e.g., yoga, massage) are scarce compared to studies evaluating single 
interventions. Fundamental animal and human research on mechanisms impacting multiple 
domains (biological, behavioral, social, environmental) that underly psychological and 
physical interventions, as well as research on potential biomarkers to predict intervention 
efficacy or treatment responses, are critical for developing strategies to optimize the 
beneficial effects of these interventions. Such studies are scientifically challenging due to 
individual heterogeneity (e.g., variability in genetic and epigenetic makeup or psychosocial 
and environmental factors) and the current lack of optimal tools and technologies to 
evaluate mechanistic and clinical effects. Nevertheless, recent advances in genomics, 
neuroscience, stem cells, systems biology, neuroimaging, and predictive computational 
modeling offer promising technological and conceptual resources and opportunities for 
innovative and impactful mechanistic studies of physical and psychological approaches.
What Does Success Look Like?
Successful mechanistic studies of psychological and physical approaches include two 
separate but interoperable accomplishments in model systems/organisms and/or human/
clinical populations across the lifespan:
—  Identification of predictive markers or biomarkers that can differentiate responders from 
nonresponders to psychological and physical approaches.
—  Identification of novel mechanisms of action underlying psychological and physical 
approaches that may shed new insights into the fundamental science of these 
approaches or be used to optimize the beneficial effects of these approaches alone or in 
combination with other therapies.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Top Scientific Priorities

--- PAGE 76 matched=['priority area', 'Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
74
Supporting Impactful Clinical Trials of Complementary 
and Integrative Health Approaches  
Introduction and Explanation of Need
To achieve the NCCIH mission to determine, through rigorous scientific investigation, the 
fundamental science, usefulness, and safety of complementary and integrative health 
approaches and their roles in improving health and health care, NCCIH supports clinical 
trials to assess the safety, efficacy, and effectiveness of these approaches. NCCIH defines 
impactful clinical trials as those that 1) provide evidence to inform clinical practice guidelines 
and health care policies or 2) provide sufficient preliminary data to inform the design of 
and ability to conduct fully powered clinical trials. Fully powered trials must be rigorously 
performed using randomized controlled designs with adequate study power to test the 
primary hypothesis. To enhance generalizability and meet NIH policy requirements, it is 
important that fully powered trials recruit participants from different geographic regions and 
include a diverse sample of participants that reflects the U.S. patient population with the 
condition being studied.
NCCIH has developed a framework for human subjects research that describes the range 
of research supported from basic and mechanistic studies through dissemination and 
implementation science studies (see page 23). Within the framework, NCCIH prioritizes 
the need for preliminary feasibility and acceptability data from the literature or a feasibility 
study to have confidence that a fully powered efficacy or effectiveness study can be 
conducted. For this priority area, NCCIH is emphasizing the support of clinical trials that 
will inform clinical guidelines and health care policy decisions. NCCIH also has interest in 
supporting randomized pragmatic clinical trials that enroll a generalizable population from 
real-world settings and leverage data from electronic health records. It is important that the 
interventions proposed for pragmatic and implementation trials have demonstrated efficacy 
or effectiveness. 
What Does Success Look Like?
— Trials supported by NCCIH provide strong evidence for clinical guideline development 
and health care policy decisions. 
— The clinical portfolio comprises a range of clinical trials to assess the impact of 
nutritional, psychological, and physical approaches, including feasibility trials, 
randomized controlled efficacy trials, randomized controlled effectiveness trials, 
randomized controlled pragmatic trials, and dissemination and implementation studies.  
— Interventions found to be feasible in early-stage trials are moved into multisite clinical 
trials to assess their safety and efficacy or effectiveness, and then interventions with 
demonstrated efficacy or effectiveness are evaluated in pragmatic trials conducted in 
health care systems, as well as dissemination and implementation studies.  
— When appropriate, the portfolio includes trials with innovative designs to address unique 
hypotheses about which complementary health approaches are most effective, for 
whom, and under what conditions.  
— NCCIH issues notices for clinical trials in specific scientific areas based on scientific need 
and as funds allow.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Top Scientific Priorities

--- PAGE 78 matched=['Scientific Priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
76
Communications Strategies and Tools To Enhance 
Scientific Literacy and Understanding of Clinical Research  
Introduction and Explanation of Need
Surveys conducted in the United States reveal that many citizens do not have a firm grasp 
of basic scientific facts and concepts, nor do they understand the scientific process. 
Without an understanding of the science of health, many consumers will continue to value 
anecdotes over evidence, believe excessive claims made by supplement manufacturers 
or TV doctors touting the latest “miracle cure,” and potentially make unwise and unsafe 
decisions about their health. Those who do possess basic knowledge of the science 
of health have the capacity to obtain, process, and understand basic information about 
scientific research needed to make appropriate decisions about their health. Given the 
current health policy and research emphasis on shared decision making with patients, 
enhanced patient understanding of the science of health is also a system-level priority. 
Health care professionals will bear a growing onus to explain and engage in dialogue with 
patients about treatment options. Promoting understanding of the science of health among 
a broad consumer base may ultimately make those discussions and decisions easier.
There is also a particular need for an improved understanding of the science of health  
for those who use complementary and integrative health approaches. Because many  
of these approaches are readily available in the marketplace and because so many 
individuals choose self-care options for their health, NCCIH sits at the crossroads between 
research and real-world consumer use. Further, to enhance the value and impact of 
NCCIH’s efforts in disseminating information, consumers need a basic understanding  
of the research enterprise.
What Does Success Look Like?
— Continuing to build on and expand the existing Know the Science effort to educate the 
public about the importance of understanding biomedical research so people can make 
informed, evidence-based decisions about their health. 
— A successful strategic effort includes qualitative and quantitative evaluation, usability 
testing, expanded content development (e.g., new topics, to include bias and causation 
versus correlation), support for scientific spokespeople, and outreach and dissemination.
Priorities
— To collaborate with partners within and external to the Federal Government committed 
to enhancing consumers’ understanding of the science of health and addressing 
misinformation that persists on the internet and in popular media and advertising.
— To develop and evaluate easy-to-understand materials in a variety of platforms and for 
diverse audiences.
— To promote the use of these materials among the general public via direct outreach and 
by targeting influential stakeholders.
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Top Scientific Priorities

--- PAGE 80 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission', 'Division \nof '] ---
78
Statutory Authority  
In October 1998, Public Law 105-277 , the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency 
Supplemental Appropriations Act, elevated the status and expanded the mandate of the 
NIH Office of Alternative Medicine by authorizing the establishment of the National Center 
for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM). In December 2014, Public Law 
113-235, the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015, included 
a provision to change NCCAM’s name to the National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health.
NCCIH Organizational Structure
NCCIH is one of 27 Institutes and Centers of NIH, the Nation’s premier biomedical research 
agency. NIH is the steward of medical and behavioral research for the Nation. The agency 
is responsible to Congress and the U.S. taxpayers for carrying out its mission to seek 
fundamental knowledge about the nature and behavior of living systems and the application 
of that knowledge to enhance health, lengthen life, and reduce illness and disability, in a 
manner that not only facilitates research but does so cost effectively and in compliance 
with applicable rules and regulations.
The NCCIH organizational structure includes an Office of the Director (OD), which provides 
overall leadership for and administration of the Center’s components, including the Division 
of Extramural Research (DER), the Division of Intramural Research (DIR), and the Division of 
Extramural Activities (DEA).
The NCCIH OD is responsible for planning, directing, and coordinating the programs and 
activities of NCCIH, including research, training, education, and information dissemination 
efforts, and providing guidance and policy direction to the offices and divisions of the 
Center regarding management, program planning, program coordination, and program 
evaluation. The OD includes the Office of Administrative Management; the Office of 
Communications and Public Liaison; the Office of Policy, Planning, and Evaluation; and the 
Office of Clinical and Regulatory Affairs.
The NCCIH DER oversees the planning, development, and implementation of scientific 
programs or areas of science that fulfill NCCIH’s mission. DER devises scientific policies, 
research and training, and career development nationally through grants and contracts 
to research organizations. The NCCIH DER is organized into two branches based on the 
type of research being supported. Both the Clinical Research Branch and the Basic and 
Mechanistic Research Branch oversee studies of complementary health approaches, 
including natural products, pre-/probiotics, manual therapies, meditation, and meditative 
movement interventions. 
The NCCIH DIR, located on the NIH campus in Bethesda, Maryland, conducts basic, 
clinical, and translational research focusing on the role of the brain in perceiving, modifying, 
and managing pain. Research projects include investigating the role of the brain in pain 
processing and control, and how factors such as emotion, attention, environment, and 
genetics affect pain perception. The program includes research that explores how 
chronic pain produces changes in the brain that can modify how the brain reacts to pain 
medications like opioids. 
NCCIH Strategic Plan FY 2021–2025
Appendix

--- PAGE 81 matched=['strategic plan', 'Vision'] ---
79
The NCCIH DEA develops, implements, and coordinates extramural programs and 
policies within NCCIH and the extramural community. The division, through its Office 
of Scientific Review, coordinates the receipt, referral, and scientific review of grants, 
cooperative agreements, and research contracts. The division, through its Office of Grants 
Management, oversees the processing of grants, cooperative agreements and contracts. 
The division also coordinates meetings of the National Advisory Council for Complementary 
and Integrative Health and manages the Center’s committee management activities.
Description of the Strategic Planning Process
From April 2020 through July 2020, stakeholders were offered several ways to contribute 
their thoughts and feedback. This included responding to a request for information (RFI) 
(https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-AT-20-013.html) using a web form or 
by email. The Center broadly disseminated information throughout the process to its many 
stakeholder groups and individuals. In May 2020, the Center hosted the webinar and town 
hall Whole Person Health: Mapping a Strategic Vision for NCCIH ( https://www.nccih.nih.
gov/news/events/whole-person-health-mapping-a-strategic-vision-for-nccih-webinar-town-
hall) in conjunction with the International Congress on Integrative Medicine and Health. In 
July 2020, NCCIH hosted a Town Hall and Public Comment Session (https://www.nccih.nih.
gov/news/events/nccih-strategic-planning-town-hall-public-comment-session) at which the 
Center invited comments from stakeholders, experts, communities, and members of the 
public, including but not limited to researchers and trainees across academia, industry, and 
government; health care providers and health advocacy organizations; nongovernmental, 
scientific, and professional organizations; and Federal agencies. Both NCCIH and NIH staff 
also provided input to the development of the strategic plan throughout the process.
The draft strategic plan was posted to the NCCIH website in February 2021, and an RFI 
(https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-AT-21-005.html) was issued for public 
comment on the draft. 
The National Advisory Council for Complementary and Integrative Health provided valuable 
input and received updates during their public meeting sessions in September 2019; 
February, June, and September 2020; and January 2021.
Mapping a Pathway to Research on Whole Person Health
