# NHLBI (FY2026-2030) — file: NHLBI_Strategic_Vision_FY2026-2030.pdf
# 55 pages matched priority-heading patterns


--- PAGE 1 matched=['VISION'] ---
 THE NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION       1
BRINGING RESEARCH TO LIFE 
THE NHLBI 
STRATEGIC VISION
FY 2026–2030

--- PAGE 2 matched=['VISION'] ---
2        NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
National Institutes of Health
www.nhlbi.nih.gov
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
The NHLBI appreciates the extensive input from its staff; the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Advisory Council  
and Board of External Experts, a working group of the Council; and the heart, lung, blood, and sleep communities  
in the development of this Strategic Vision.
BRINGING RESEARCH TO LIFE
THE NHLBI  
STRATEGIC VISION 
FY 2026–2030
The NHLBI Strategic Vision was released on October 1, 2025, and aligns 
w
ith current administration priorities and programmatic goals.   
It will be implemented through September 31, 2030.

--- PAGE 3 matched=['Objective 1', 'Strategic Plan', 'TABLE OF CONTENTS'] ---
3        NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
TABLE OF CONTENTS
4 Director’s Message 
6  Strategic Plan Framework
7 Overview
16  Strategic Priorities 
1
6 Capacity Priorities
1
9 Operational Priorities
23 
Research Priorities 
  26 Objective 1
30 
Objective 2
  33 Objective 3
  36 
Objective 4
  39 Objective 5
  44 Objective 6
  48 Objective 7
  50 Objective 8  
55  Appendix 

--- PAGE 4 matched=['VISION', 'mission'] ---
4        NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
DIRECTOR’S MESSAGE
Transformative vision propels science and its application to advance 
health and health care, and for over 75 years, the public has entrusted 
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) to support and 
advance research and its translation to improve lives and save lives  
for people across our nation and around the world. As a public service science institute, our 
mission is to simultaneously see over the horizon to identify future challenges and opportunities 
while discovering and applying solutions to our current and newly emergent health and public 
health challenges. 
NHLBI’s transformative vision comes from the public we serve — from people and communities 
from every walk of life who bring unique, diverse, and complementary expertise, insights, and 
lived experience to inform, inspire, and innovate. In this context, the collaborative Strategic Vision 
we first developed in 2016 catalyzed and powered advances across heart, lung, blood, and sleep 
(HLBS) science and medicine, moving the entire biomedical enterprise forward to achieve health 
and healthcare milestones that appeared as distant goals when we glimpsed them over the 
horizon 8 years ago. 
Your contributions — driven by collaborative community action — energized discovery science 
and its application to gene therapies so that in 2024, multiple U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)-approved therapeutics now exist to ameliorate sickle cell disease, bringing hope and better 
health to the individuals and families that have so long born the burden of this transgenerational 
disorder. Similarly, our collaborative partnerships enabled our swift, agile, multifaceted, and 
ongoing responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. Discovery science provided us the tools while 
community-powered implementation efforts translated this science into action to save lives and 
improve health outcomes in every community, including those bearing the gravest burdens —  
our most underserved and high-risk populations.
Through forward-thinking collaboration with stakeholders and partners, we revisited our  
Strategic Vision to update our collective “view” over the horizon and to assess emergent 
hypersonic technological developments that are exponentially accelerating scientific  
discoveries and medical advances.
 

--- PAGE 5 matched=['VISION'] ---
5        NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
Throughout this update, we have renewed and expanded our commitment to diverse and inclusive 
partnerships, collaborative community-based research, and the rapid translation of discovery 
science into public health improvements and frontline, personalized, point-of-care medicine. 
The updated NHLBI Strategic Vision better enables us to adapt and leverage emergent science and 
technology to redress today’s most pressing health issues, while helping us anticipate the future with 
foresight and compass points to guide our actions and facilitate our progress. Although emerging 
tools like artificial intelligence and machine learning promise to further our understanding of human 
biology and to accelerate improvements in health and health care, we remain deeply committed to 
the ethical application of all scientific and technological discoveries to ensure health for all, and to 
ameliorate health disparities, including addressing the social determinants of health (SDOH) that are 
the very foundations of good health. Well health, health promotion, disease prevention, and treatment 
are inseparable from SDOH, and some of our greatest challenges now and in the future revolve 
around whole health and the health of our environment. 
As new discoveries are made and our understanding of human biology increases, our Strategic 
Vision will continue to evolve, serving as evergreen guidance to allow us to adaptively respond 
to rapidly changing challenges, opportunities, discoveries, and resources. Fundamental biology, 
implementation science, and community partnerships have been the backbone of NHLBI’s research 
since our founding 75 years ago, and those tenets will continue to power transformative science and 
its implementation for better health and health care.
A cornerstone of our public service science is the continuous and productive engagement of a broad, 
diverse, and inclusive circle of partners. Your synergistic and complementary voices provide robust, 
resilient, and adaptive guidance enabling and empowering swift, efficient, and effective leveraging of 
unprecedented scientific opportunities to redress HLBS health challenges now and in the generations 
that follow. 
We are deeply grateful for your partnership and for your individual and collective expertise and 
input as we continue our work together to achieve better health, equitable top-tier health care, and 
effective and responsive public health that improves lives and saves lives for all people across our 
country and around our world.
Sincerely,
Gary H. Gibbons, M.D
. 
Director, NHLBI

--- PAGE 6 matched=['CROSSCUTTING THEME', 'STRATEGIC PLAN', 'VISION'] ---
6        NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
NHLBI STRATEGIC PLAN FRAMEWORK 
OVERVIEW OF THE NHLBI 
MISSION: The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (N HLBI) provides global leadership for a research, training, and education program to 
promote the prevention and treatment of heart, lung, and blood diseases and sleep disorders to enhance the health of all individuals so that they can 
live longer and more fulfilling lives. 
NHLBI STRATEGIC GOALS 
UNDERSTAND HUMAN BIOLOGY 
To expand knowledge of the molecular, cellular, and physiological mechanisms 
governing the normal function of HLBS systems as essential elements for 
sustaining human health. 
To enable and develop a diverse biomedical workforce equipped with the 
essential research resources to pursue emerging opportunities in science. 
DEVELOP WORKFORCE 
AND RESOURCES 
REDUCE HUMAN DISEASE 
To extend our knowledge of the pathobiology of HLBS disorders and enable 
clinical investigations that advance the prediction , prevention , preemption , 
treatment, and cures of human diseases . 
To facilitate innovation and accelerate research translation across the entire research 
spectrum, bridging basic to clinical, clinical to practice, and population to health impact. 
ADVANCE TRANSLATIONAL 
RESEARCH 
ct~ 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 
0 
e 
e e 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Understand normal biological function and resilience 
Investigate newly discovered pathobiological mechanisms important to the onset and progression of heart, lung, 
and blood diseases and sleep disorders 
Investigate factors that account for differences in health status among populations 
Identify factors that account for individual differences in pathobiology and in response to treatments 
Develop and optimize novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies to prevent, treat, and cure heart, lung, and blood 
diseases and sleep disorders 
Optimize clinical and implementation research to improve health and to reduce disease 
Leverage emerging opportunities in data science to open new frontiers in research on heart, lung, and blood diseases 
and sleep disorders 
Further develop and sustain a scient ific workforce capable of accomplishing the NHLBI mission 
CROSSCUTTING THEMES 
• 
' 
• 
. 
• 
Harnessing data science 
and new technologies to 
drive scientific discovery 
and precision health 
Using novel approaches for 
addressing health disparities 
and tackling their biological 
underpinnings for heart, lung, and 
blood diseases and sleep disorders 
Furthering the 
science on the 
importance of 
lifestyle behaviors 
Leveraging the power 
of community and 
patient engagement 
Supporting women's 
health through 
the lifespan 

--- PAGE 7 matched=['VISION', 'MISSION'] ---
7        NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
OVERVIEW
MISSION 
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
(NHLBI) provides global leadership for a research, 
training, and education program to promote the 
prevention and treatment of heart, lung, and 
blood diseases and sleep (HLBS) disorders and 
enhance the health of all individuals so that they 
can live longer and more fulfilling lives. The NHLBI 
stimulates basic discoveries about the causes of 
disease, enables the translation of basic discoveries 
into clinical practice, fosters training and mentoring 
of emerging scientists and physicians, and 
communicates research advances to the public. 
Partnerships are imperative to advancing the 
Institute’s mission. The NHLBI creates and supports 
a robust, collaborative research infrastructure in 
partnership with private, public, and community 
organizations, in addition to academic institutions, 
industry, and other government agencies. 
Collaborations with patients, families, healthcare 
professionals, scientists, professional societies, 
patient advocacy groups, community organizations, 
and the media are essential to promoting the 
application of research results and leveraging 
resources to address public health needs. The 
NHLBI also fosters ongoing relationships with 
international organizations to help reduce the 
burden of HLBS diseases and disorders worldwide. 
NHLBI’S ENDURING  
PRINCIPLES 
• Value investigator- 
initiated fundamental
discovery science
• Maintain a balanced
cross-disciplinary portf
olio
(basic, translational,
clinical, population science)
• Train and nurture a
diver
se new generation
of leaders f
or the
biomedical workforce
• Support implementation
science that empowers
patients and enables
partners to improve health
• Innovate an evidence-
based elimination of
health inequities in
the United States and
around the world


--- PAGE 8 matched=['VISION'] ---
8        NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
RELEVANT MANDATES
In June 1948, President Harry S. Truman signed 
the National Heart Act (Public Law 80-655), which 
created and established the National Heart Institute 
(NHI). That August, Surgeon General Leonard A. 
Scheele, by General Circular No. 36, Organization 
Order No. 14, established the NHI as one of the 
Institutes at the National Institutes of Health (NIH). 
On November 10, 1969, the NHI was renamed the 
National Heart and Lung Institute (NHLI) to reflect the 
expansion of the NHI’s functions. Three years later, 
the National Heart, Blood Vessel, Lung, and Blood 
Act of 1972 (P .L. 92-423) expanded the Institute’s 
authority to advance the national response against 
heart, blood vessel, lung, and blood diseases. The act provided for intensified and coordinated 
Institute activities in accordance with a comprehensive, specified National Heart, Blood Vessel, 
Lung, and Blood Disease Program to be planned by the director and the Advisory Council.
In June 1976, Title I of the Health Research and Health Services Amendments of 1976 (P .L. 94-
278) redesignated the NHLI as the NHLBI to even further reinforce the national fight against
heart, blood vessel, lung, and blood diseases. It authorized the NHLBI to conduct research in the
use of blood and blood products and in the management of blood resources. In June 1993, the
NIH Revitalization Act of 1993 (P .L. 103-43) established the National Center on Sleep Disorders
Research (NCSDR) within the NHLBI. The NHLBI currently operates under the Research and
Investigation Section 301, U.S. Code Citation 428241; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Section 401(a), U.S. Code Citation 42281. The NHLBI director and the National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Advisory Council continue to plan the national program under the basic P .L. 92-423
provisions with some refinements.
ORGANIZATION
An organization chart can be found in appendix I.

--- PAGE 9 matched=['VISION'] ---
9        NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
THE BURDEN OF HEART, LUNG, BLOOD, AND SLEEP DISORDERS
Since its inception, the NHLBI community has fostered a legacy of research excellence through 
groundbreaking fundamental discovery science, landmark clinical trials and population-based 
cohort studies, and innovative health education and dissemination efforts. Despite the significant 
advances in treatment and prevention made during these decades, the chronic conditions 
resulting from HLBS diseases and disorders still pose a major health and economic burden on 
the United States. Through its broad research portfolio, the NHLBI is tasked with combating not 
only the major causes of death and disability, but also rare disorders such as sickle cell disease, 
thalassemia, and pulmonary fibrosis. Although these disorders are rare in the overall population, 
the burdens they place on those affected are enormous. Despite research advances, HLBS 
diseases and disorders continue to be among the leading causes of death and disability in the 
United States.
Heart disease and 
hypertension are among the 
most common, costly, and 
preventable health conditions 
in the United States.
1
Despite progress in treating  
and preventing complications  
of numerous blood diseases,  
many people still face challenges 
and a diminished quality of life.
2 
Obstructive pulmonary 
diseases remain a leading 
cause of death and disability  
 in the United States.
2 
Sleep dysfunction and 
insufficient sleep affect 
millions of Americans  
and are associated with 
cognitive impairments.
2 
Many of these diseases have a disproportionate impact on people of color, people living in rural 
communities, and other underserved populations.
2 
Source: (1) NIH.gov, (2) NHLBI ADV
ANCING Heart, Lung, Blood, and Sleep Research
BUILDING ON PAST SUCCESS TO PREPARE FOR THE FUTURE
The NHLBI must anticipate and capitalize on emerging scientific opportunities as well as foresee 
and identify approaches to overcome new barriers to progress. Strategic visioning is a process 
that was initiated in recognition of these needs and in acknowledgment of the transformational 
scientific advances that are emerging at an accelerating pace. 

--- PAGE 10 matched=['VISION'] ---
10       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
Investigator-initiated ideas are the principal 
way we support science, but the complex and 
nuanced nature of emerging threats to public 
health require creative solutions that help 
address problems that are complex, highly 
evolving, and that have undefined endpoints.  
This unique approach is evident in NHLBI’s 
responses to the burden of sickle cell disease 
and to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Cure Sickle Cell initiative was created by the NHLBI in 2018 to use emerging safe and 
promising genetic therapies to improve the lives of individuals living with sickle cell disease. 
This initiative actively engages the sickle cell disease community — patients, family members, 
caregivers, and advocates — to work together on a path to a cure. Cure Sickle Cell encourages 
collaboration among researchers, industry, nonprofit organizations, and policy-making agencies, 
all of whom play a role in exploring the scientific questions needed to safely and effectively 
advance potential therapies.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the NHLBI evolved a strategy not unlike that of the Cure 
Sickle Cell initiative. In June 2020, the NHLBI developed the Collaborating Network of Networks for 
Evaluating COVID-19 and Therapeutic Strategies (CONNECTS) initiative. This program facilitated 
collaboration between experts in pulmonary, critical care, and cardiothoracic surgeries and 
enabled the development of a master protocol for research on treatments to reduce serious 
illness and death in patients with COVID-19. In 2020, the NHLBI initiated three clinical trials that 
later became part of CONNECTS and the NIH Accelerating COVID-19 Therapeutic Interventions 
and Vaccines (ACTIV) public–private partnership. The goal was to develop a coordinated research 
strategy for prioritizing and speeding the development of the most promising treatments and 
vaccines. Known as ACTIV-4, this program investigated the efficacy of anticoagulation and 
antithrombotic therapy in reducing life-threatening thrombotic cardiovascular and pulmonary 
complications in newly diagnosed COVID-19 patients not requiring hospital admission, COVID-19 
patients hospitalized with moderate and severe disease, and patients recovering from COVID-19.  


--- PAGE 11 matched=['VISION', 'mission'] ---
11       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
The NHLBI has either expanded or enhanced innovative and collaborative approaches to other 
complex challenges to HLBS health. Some notable examples include:
PROJECTS
The Alliance for Community 
Engagement – Partnership 
for Action Toward Health 
(ACE-PATH)
ACE-PATH seeks to empower communities cumulatively and disproportionately 
affected by social determinants of health (SDOH) and health disparities across the 
United States. Its primary goal is to maximize community engagement to achieve 
optimal health despite climate related risks. Supported community-engaged research 
projects are charged to (1) Identify, develop, and test effective community-engaged 
strategies to improve the adoption and use of specific treatments or tools to respond 
to community health challenges. (2) Support community-engaged research to enhance 
the adoption, integration, and sustainment of interventions addressing the impacts of 
local health stressors. (3) Build trust and strong partnerships with all interested 
parties to exchange knowledge and encourage implementation of promising practices 
to strengthen and improve community health. (4) Inform strategies to reduce the 
effects of prioritized local health stressors in U.S. communities.
Accelerating Medicines 
Partnership® (AMP®)
AMP® is a public–private partnership between the NIH, the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), multiple biopharmaceutical and life science companies, 
and nonprofit and other organizations. It aims to transform the current model for 
developing new diagnostics and treatments. Thus far (2024), AMP has supported nine 
scientific projects, one of which the NHLBI sponsors, which addresses heart failure.
Community Engagement 
Alliance (CEAL) 
CEAL’s mission is to improve health outcomes, and strengthen community 
partnerships through community-engaged research that addresses health 
disparities. The alliance includes various initiatives that promote community-engaged 
research aimed at improving the health and well-being of communities that most 
often experience health disparities. These initiatives encourage community-driven, 
intervention-based research to address disparities in the context of SDOH, as well 
as the Community Engagement Alliance Consultative Resource (CEACR), a unique 
program that provides targeted consultations to researchers looking to improve  
their community engagement and participation efforts.
Precision Medicine and  
Data Science Programs: 
BioData Catalyst and  
Trans-Omics for Precision 
Medicine (TOPMed)
NHLBI’s TOPMed contributes to NIH’s precision medicine enterprise through the 
integration of whole-genome sequencing and other omics data (e.g., metabolic 
profiles, epigenomics, protein and RNA expression patterns) with behavioral, 
imaging, environmental, and clinical data. NHLBI’s Biodata Catalyst is a cloud-based 
ecosystem that offers researchers data, analytic tools, applications, and workflows 
in secure workspaces. It increases access to NHLBI datasets and provides innovative 
data analysis capabilities to help researchers accelerate discoveries and develop 
new diagnostic tools, therapeutics, and prevention strategies.
NIH-Global Alliance for 
Chronic Diseases (GACD) 
Partnership
This global partnership, with NIH participation, supports implementation and 
multimorbidity research to reduce the noncommunicable disease burden in low- and 
middle-income countries, as well as for the first t

--- PAGE 12 matched=['VISION'] ---
12       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
PROJECTS
Helping to End Addiction 
Long-term® (NIH HEAL 
Initiative®)
HEAL is an aggressive NIH-wide, interagency effort to speed up scientific solutions 
that stem the national opioid public health crisis. The NHLBI, as part of the HEAL 
initiative, explores our current understanding of pain and works to establish 
biomarkers for pain and to develop non-opioid therapeutics for pain management.
NIH Implementing a  
Maternal health and 
PRegnancy Outcomes  
Vision for Everyone 
(IMPROVE)
An NIH-wide initiative, IMPROVE aims to reduce preventable causes of maternal 
morbidity and mortality and to improve health for women before, during, and after 
delivery. IMPROVE supports the IMPROVE Community Implementation Program 
(IMPROVE-CIP) in partnership with the NHLBI and focuses on decreasing maternal 
health disparities related to mental health, substance use, psychosocial factors, and 
social and structural determinants of health. IMPROVE-CIP uses implementation 
science to bring known effective maternal health interventions into communities 
severely affected by maternal health disparities.
Maternal Health Community 
Implementation Program 
(MH-CIP)
The MH-CIP program aims to reduce maternal deaths and improve maternal health 
outcomes, especially in populations that are disproportionately affected by high 
rates of pregnancy-related complications and deaths. MH-CIP develops and tests 
community-based implementation strategies to increase the adoption, uptake, scale-
up, and scale-out of evidence-based interventions that improve health before, during, 
and after pregnancy. The program emphasizes community-engaged implementation 
research that is firmly connected to and embedded in affected communities.
Nulliparous Pregnancy 
Outcomes Study: Monitoring 
Mothers-to-Be Heart Healthy 
Study (nuMOM2b HHS)
Funded by the NHLBI, this study examines the effects of pregnancy complications on 
future cardiovascular health, including social factors that correlate with the future 
heart health of new parents, especially in communities of color.
Risk Underlying Rural  
Areas Longitudinal  
(RURAL) cohort study
Established in 2019, this study is addressing the high burden of chronic heart and 
lung disease in America’s heartland. RURAL is monitoring individuals in 10 rural 
communities in Alabama, Kentucky, Louisiana, and Mississippi by using community-
engaged partners and high-tech mobile research units to collect data including 
medical histories, familial, lifestyle, and behavioral factors.
Multi-ethnic Observational 
Study in American Asian  
and Pacific islander 
Communities (MOSAAIC) 
initiative
The MOSAAIC initiative is a seven-year study, launched in 2023, that focuses on 
studying cardiovascular health, lung health, mental health, and social determinants 
of health in individuals that self-identify as having ancestral background from 
East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia; or self-identify as Native Hawaiian and/or 
Pacific Islander.
Early Intervention to 
Promote Cardiovascular 
Health of Mothers and 
Children (ENRICH) Initiative
The ENRICH initiative is a seven-year community-based, parallel group, two arm, 
cluster-randomized trial that focuses on enriching evidence-based maternal  
and child health Home Visiting (HV) with cardiovascular health promotion content 
(ENRICHed HV) and compares it with usual HV through partnership, collaboration  
and engagement of HV agencies. About 3,200 parent

--- PAGE 13 matched=['VISION', 'mission'] ---
13       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
NHLBI has demonstrated a consistent 
commitment to accomplishing its mission. 
As we march into the future, we will use 
innovative problem-solving strategies to 
address the burden of heart, lung, and blood 
diseases and sleep disorders. 
STRATEGIC VISION  
PLANNING PROCESS
Strategic visioning is a process that was 
initiated in recognition of the transformational 
scientific advances that are emerging at 
an accelerating pace. By design, the NHLBI 
Strategic Vision is a dynamic document, 
regularly updated with input from people at 
the leading edge of health and science. Many 
research goals that once seemed remote 
are now within reach, and innovative technologies have rendered mundane scientific processes 
more facile. For example, in the next decade, preventable cardiovascular disease deaths for all 
age groups could decline by more than 30 percent with greater adoption of proven prevention 
and treatment strategies. A stroke-free era for children worldwide with sickle cell disease is now 
imaginable. The NHLBI Strategic Vision is the culmination of an unprecedented effort to engage 
communities in identifying and prioritizing the most compelling science for which the NHLBI 
provides leadership. 
Over the next 5 years, these collective ideas could catalyze the closing of large gaps in knowledge 
and could break through significant barriers to research progress in adherence to the Institute’s 
enduring principles.  
This document reflects an update of the 2016 Strategic Vision, which included more than 100 
compelling questions and critical challenges that aligned with eight scientific objectives and four 
goals. For this update, the NHLBI harnessed collective inputs and community-level participation 
to highlight areas of emerging needs and scientific advancements. 
STRATEGIC VISION INPUT FUNNEL
Past Meeting 
 Discussion
Board of  
External Experts  
(BEE)/ Council  
Inputs
Request f
or  
Information  
(RFI)/ Public  
Input 
New or Revised Compelling Questions (CQs) and Critical 
Challenges (CCs) for FY 2026–2030 Strategic Vision 

--- PAGE 14 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN', 'VISION'] ---
14       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
Focus areas were identified following an extensive 
review of past meetings and discussions by NHLBI 
leadership, including the National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Advisory Council, the Board of External 
Experts, and a working group of council and division 
leaders. Input from constituents — scientists, 
medical professionals, policymakers, patients, 
patient advocates, and professional groups — was 
solicited through a series of webinars and a request 
for information (RFI) that received 141 individual 
responses and over 700 answers to prompted 
questions on various topics. These included 
harnessing data science and new technologies to 
drive scientific discovery and precision health, using 
novel approaches for addressing health disparities 
and tackling their biological underpinnings for HLBS 
diseases and disorders, leveraging the power of 
community and patient engagement, furthering the 
science on the importance of lifestyle behaviors, 
supporting women’s health through the lifespan, and addressing and reducing the impact of 
“place” (geography, climate, rural/urban, neighborhood) on HLBS health. 
Input sought included perspectives on critical research needs or compelling questions for any of 
the focus areas, perspectives on challenges or barriers that needed to be addressed to support 
progress, and the relevance of the eight objectives for the NHLBI Strategic Vision and any 
critical challenges or questions that were not already incorporated in the NHLBI Strategic Vision. 
Feedback that resonated as high priorities for the Institute based on timeliness, feasibility, and 
potential to advance the field of study was incorporated into the updated Strategic Vision.
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STRATEGIC PLAN
The NHLBI continually assesses and monitors progress toward the previously described four 
goals and eight objectives while responding to new challenges and building on emerging 
discoveries. We recognize fully that the Strategic Vision alone is insufficient to affect change 
without meaningful oversight and implementation. 


--- PAGE 15 matched=['goals and objectives', 'VISION'] ---
15       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
To confirm that NHLBI-funded activities remain in alignment with the Institute’s priorities, 
periodic analyses are conducted to evaluate research portfolios for potential gaps and 
opportunities in meeting the goals and objectives of the Strategic Vision. In addition, each 
division engages publicly through workshops and other efforts to garner inputs and insights 
supporting the establishment priorities for science. The divisions are assessed on an ongoing 
basis regarding their oversight of scientific programs and portfolios to achieve these objectives 
and to ensure that ideas and operations align with the Strategic Vision. 
NHLBI leadership engages frequently and meaningfully in cross-disciplinary collaboration 
to ensure that NHLBI priorities remain dynamic and responsive and that decisions about 
scientific programs and policies are informed by scientific evidence and input from the scientific 
community. Every year the Advisory Council convenes with the Board of External Experts 
to discuss progress made and to keep a pulse on priorities that the NHLBI can support and 
barriers it can address. Past meetings have included discussions on emerging topics of interest, 
including the impact of climate, data science, and health disparities. Throughout the year the 
director, Dr. Gary Gibbons, routinely participates in listening sessions to hear from scientists, 
patient advocates, and community health leaders across the globe and to discuss health 
concerns and research opportunities. These encounters serve to identify emerging opportunities 
and to obtain expert advice and guidance on the implementation of the Strategic Vision.


--- PAGE 16 matched=['Objective 8', 'goals and objectives', 'VISION'] ---
16       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES
NHLBI CAPACITY AND OPERATIONAL PRIORITIES
The NHLBI is committed to excellence in its stewardship of the trust of the American public and of 
the taxpayer funds appropriated by Congress. This commitment aims to ensure that all research 
and administrative resources are used responsibly to advance the mission to prevent and treat 
heart, lung, and blood diseases and sleep disorders. 
Capacity Priorities
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
To support the staff working at NIH, the NHLBI 
employs internal programs and training 
opportunities to promote the professional 
growth and development of its workforce. These 
programs aim to foster an appreciation for and 
commitment to workforce excellence and cultural 
competency, as well as promote the professional 
growth of individuals within the Institute. The 
NHLBI also supports NIH-funded programs that 
attract, recruit, and retain researchers from 
varying backgrounds throughout all stages of 
their careers.
Recruit and Retain
A commitment to promoting scientific opportunities to all groups equally begins with investing in 
the Institute’s workforce through planned and thoughtful recruitment and retention efforts. 
Strategic Objective 8 is focused 
on the development of a scientific 
workforce that is capable of 
accomplishing the NHLBI mission. 
However, capacity and operational 
priorities are integral to the identity 
of the NHLBI and are represented 
throughout the Strategic Vision’s 
goals and objectives.

--- PAGE 17 matched=['VISION'] ---
17       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
The NHLBI has numerous programs and 
initiatives intended to encourage individuals to 
either join the research workforce or further 
the career they have started. These programs 
include opportunities for summer research 
experiences for high school students, which 
allow a chance for trainees, including those 
from disadvantaged communities, to hear 
and get excited about a public service career 
in the biomedical sciences. For those already 
focused on the sciences, the Helena Mishoe 
Fellowship supports postbaccalaureate 
individuals in biomedical research. Additional 
NHLBI training programs help junior faculty 
and transitioning postdoctoral candidates 
launch their academic research careers and 
navigate the complex landscape of academic career progression. The NHLBI has also established 
re-entry programs for established investigators who have had their research careers interrupted 
for life events such as child-rearing or personal or family illness or injury.
Train Staff to Build a Collaborative and Engaging Workplace
A commitment to teamwork and excellence begins with increasing cultural competency among 
staff, which helps develop an environment in which everyone feels welcomed, respected, and 
free to be their authentic selves. The Institute’s Training and Leadership Development Program 
provides multiple professional development offerings to support this effort. These trainings 
are dynamic — adapting as needs are identified — and address topics such as the basics of 
teamwork and the role staff play in supporting a collaborative and supportive workplace. The 
trainings aim to promote a sense of belonging, engagement, and efficacy that is in alignment with 
— and reinforced by — organizational norms, values, and processes. They emphasize the crucial 
roles staff play in translating these norms and values into action.


--- PAGE 18 matched=['VISION', 'mission'] ---
18       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
RESOURCES AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
The thoughtful and strategic stewardship of resources is crucial to the success of the NHLBI 
mission. Toward that end, rigorous oversight and guidance is applied to the sharing of data 
and biospecimens and to the accessibility and management of resources and infrastructure. 
Strengthen Biorepositories 
The NHLBI demonstrates its commitment to the responsible management of research 
investments by promoting scientific rigor and maximizing the use of data and biospecimen 
resources. We emphasize standardizing protocols and resource handling to maximize 
reproducibility. The Biologic Specimen and Data Repository Information Coordinating Center 
(BioLINCC) supports access to NHLBI-funded biospecimen and data resources and enables 
access to and maximizes the scientific value of both the biorepository and data repository. 
Promote Data Science
The NHLBI BioData Catalyst® is an innovative data ecosystem that allows researchers to  
access data, analytics tools, applications, and workflows. Investigators may access data  
in a multidimensional environment at the scale and depth that makes the data readable for 
artificial intelligence and machine learning capabilities. This groundbreaking coordination  
of datasets promotes equal access, transparency, and collaboration between scientific 
partners. It also democratizes data in a way that enables reproducibility and accelerates 
progress toward discoveries that reduce the burden of heart, lung, and blood diseases  
and sleep disorders. 

--- PAGE 19 matched=['VISION', 'mission'] ---
19       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
Operational Priorities 
PARTNERSHIPS AND INNOVATION 
Crucial to advancing the Institute’s mission is the support, input, and insights from and 
collaborations with the many communities vested in HLBS research. Scientific advancement is 
driven through the free flow and exchange of ideas and knowledge. For the NHLBI, engagement 
and partnerships (within and beyond the NIH and the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services [HHS]) are foundational to the generation of scientific ideas. These exchanges occur 
between people with a range of expertise, influence, and interests, including patients and their 
families, patient advocacy groups and community organizations, local health departments, 
scientists, healthcare professionals, professional societies, and the media.
Enhance Partnerships
Research is a collaborative effort that would not be possible without the insights and support 
gained from research partners that work directly with NHLBI investigators. These have included, 
for example, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which supports the development of affordable, 
gene-based cures for sickle cell disease and HIV, and the California Institute for Regenerative 
Medicine (CIRM), which works with the NHLBI to explore the use of innovative technologies and 
therapies. Another example is our partnership with the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation 
(IHME), which supports county-level assessments of the U.S. burden of diseases and risks. Of great 
value are the partnerships and meaningful engagements with community-based organizations 
and patient representatives who work alongside our funded investigators to achieve our research 
objectives. These engagements provide insights that expand our perspectives on approaches to 
advancing HLBS research. Having effective partnerships across our portfolio is an indispensable 
research asset. 
Promote Innovation
The Institute harnesses the creativity of individual scientists by maintaining a vigorous 
investigator-initiated research portfolio. The NHLBI Small Business Innovation Research/Small 
Business Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR) program fosters knowledge, ideas, and innovation by 
supporting research and development conducted by U.S. -owned and -operated small businesses 
that pursue commercially promising technologies to prevent, diagnose, and treat HLBS-related 
diseases and disorders. 

--- PAGE 20 matched=['VISION'] ---
20       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
Similarly, the NHLBI Catalyze Program, a pipeline for the development of technologies and 
products, aims to drive the discovery of new therapies and cures; support the development 
of novel predictive, diagnostic, and therapeutic products; and train a diverse and globally 
competitive biomedical workforce. This program offers a coordinated support system to 
help investigators use their product development and entrepreneurial skills for innovative 
technologies and transformative platforms.
TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY 
As part of its efforts to enhance communication and 
engagement to build trust and confidence, the NHLBI has 
supported robust programs that call for community and  
clinic interactions that uphold key values. Those values 
include implementing evidence-based science and providing 
patients with education resources that help lead to better 
health outcomes. These programs are all targeted to ensure 
that NHLBI research reaches and benefits those who are  
most in need.
DISSEMINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION RESEARCH FOR POPULATIONS  
AND COMMUNITIES 
To ensure that research progress extends to communities, the NHLBI supports dissemination 
and implementation research programs designed to translate evidence-based practices and 
interventions into real-world settings where patients and affected communities might benefit.  
For example, the Disparities Elimination through Coordinated Interventions to Prevent and Control 
Heart and Lung Disease Risk (DECIPHeR) program — an ambitious national effort — develops, 
tests, and supports sustainable implementation of strategies that achieve health equity in the 
treatment of cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases and risks while maximizing the positive 
impact on community health. Similarly, the Heart, Lung, and Blood Co-morbidities Implementation 
Models in People Living with HIV (HLB SIMPLe) program is exploring strategies for the optimal  
and sustainable delivery of effective prevention and treatment of HLBS comorbidities in people 
living with HIV in low- and middle-income countries and Small Island Developing States.  

--- PAGE 21 matched=['VISION'] ---
21       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
Programs like DECIPHeR and HLB-SIMPLe recognize the many factors associated with the 
successful implementation of evidence-based interventions and guidelines in clinical and 
community settings. This is especially the case for people in underserved populations — those  
who are part of certain racial and ethnic minority groups, who live in rural areas, and who have  
a lower socioeconomic status.
Educate Patients
The NHLBI supports several educational programs that aim to ensure patients receive evidence-
based resources that raise their awareness about HLBS health. These resources include content 
related to sleep, diet, and nutrition, as well as other lifestyle issues that transcend the NHLBI 
portfolio. NHLBI education efforts support the advancement of evidence-based diet plans, 
including the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) eating plan and the Therapeutic 
Lifestyle Changes (TLC) program, that help improve cholesterol numbers. Other programs include 
The Heart Truth®, a legacy Institute program first designed to raise awareness about heart 
disease as the leading cause of death in women but has expanded to address heart disease as the 
leading cause of death for all Americans, with special emphasis on disproportionately impacted 
communities; the Blood Diseases & Disorders Education Program, which aims to bring greater 
visibility to blood donation, blood safety, and blood diseases and disorders like anemia and sickle 
cell disease; and Learn More Breathe Better®, which promotes awareness of lung health, including 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, and other lung diseases that affect 
Americans. These programs are critical to our mandate to ensure that NHLBI research progress is 
disseminated to meet the health information needs of health and community professionals and the 
public, particularly those who might benefit the most.


--- PAGE 22 matched=['VISION'] ---
22       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
By diligently establishing networks and maintaining our capacity to operate, the NHLBI can  
ensure that we are able to effectively respond to public health emergencies as they arise. 
Establish Networks
NHLBI networks were poised to respond to the nation’s research needs when the COVID-19 
pandemic hit. By April 2020, the NHLBI issued a funding opportunity as part of the trans-NIH ACTIV 
initiative. This resulted in the launch of CONNECTS in June 2020. CONNECTS built upon NHLBI’s 
existing clinical research networks across the nation and around the world to better understand 
the risk of severe illness from COVID-19. The network efficiently brought together experts from 
various fields, including pulmonary critical care physicians and cardiothoracic surgeons. These 
experts collaborated to develop a research master protocol for researching effective treatments 
that reduced serious illness and death in patients with COVID-19. The lessons learned from 
the COVID-19 pandemic will serve to ensure that the Institute remains poised to act swiftly and 
decisively for any future public health emergencies. 
Maintain Continuity of Operations
It is crucial that the NHLBI maintains plans and resources to ensure that operations to support 
HLBS health continue during a crisis. Continuity of Operations (COOP) planning enables us to 
prepare to respond during an emergency, and it ensures the execution of essential functions 
through all circumstances. COOP planning is a multilayered resource that includes COOP guides 
and multiple training programs designed to ensure the continuous execution of essential functions 
through all circumstances. 
Increase the Capacity to Operate
Recognizing that today’s infrastructure may not be best suited to respond to tomorrow’s crises, 
the NHLBI is continually working to optimize our research resources so that we remain flexible 
and adaptable in our ability to address the next public health emergency. To that end, we are 
committed to diversifying our workforce, securing our research infrastructures, accelerating  
our research, and enriching our community relationships and partnerships.

--- PAGE 23 matched=['crosscutting \ntheme', 'VISION', 'mission'] ---
23       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
RESEARCH PRIORITIES
The NHLBI Strategic Vision is focused on four goals, eight objectives, and five crosscutting 
themes: The four goals broadly define NHLBI’s vision. The eight objectives address critical 
challenges that create barriers to HLBS health. The five crosscutting themes address complex 
areas of critical need across the objectives. 
8 objectives provide 
a framework for 
moving heart, lung, 
blood, and sleep 
science forward
4 mission-oriented 
goals are at the  
center of the  
Strategic Vision
STRATEGIC GOALS
The four goals root the NHLBI  
within its mission areas and seek 
to understand and promote health 
and resilience, stimulate discoveries 
about the causes of disease, 
accelerate the translation of basic 
research discoveries into clinical 
practice, and foster training and 
mentoring of emerging scientists 
and physicians. 
UNDERSTAND 
HUMAN 
BIOLOGY
ADVANCE 
TRANSLATIONAL
RESEARCH
REDUCE 
HUMAN 
DISEASE
DEVELOP
WORKFORCE 
AND RESOURCES

--- PAGE 24 matched=['CROSSCUTTING THEME', 'VISION', 'mission'] ---
24       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
The eight objectives provide the framework for establishing strategic research priorities. Each 
objective reflects one or more of the mission-driven strategic goals and promotes the exploration 
of both biological and nonbiological contributors to health and disease. These objectives guide the 
NHLBI’s mission to propel HLBS science forward by exploring research opportunities and making 
strategic investments in areas ripe for discovery. Although these objectives are not meant to 
embody NHLBI’s entire research portfolio, they will play a key role in guiding the Institute’s ability  
to set, and periodically refine, a research agenda and priorities for the next decade. 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
Under
stand normal biological function  
and resilience 
In
vestigate newly discovered pathobiological 
mechanisms important to the onset and 
progression of heart, lung, and blood diseases  
and sleep disorders  
In
vestigate factors that account for differences in 
health status among populations 
Identify
 factors that account for individual 
differences in pathobiology and in responses  
to treatments 
De
velop and optimize novel diagnostic  
and therapeutic strategies to prevent, treat,  
and cure heart, lung, and blood diseases and  
sleep disorders
Optimize
 clinical and implementation research  
to improve health and reduce disease
Le
verage emerging opportunities in data science
to open new frontiers in research on heart, lung,
and blood diseases and sleep disorders 
8 F
urther develop and sustain a  
scientific workforce capable of accomplishing  
the NHLBI’s mission
CROSSCUTTING THEMES
The five crosscutting themes span all eight objectives and represent complex scientific challenges 
that require strategic support to create significant biomedical advances. They are represented by 
the icons below and address data science, health disparities, lifestyle behaviors, community and 
patient engaged research, and women’s health.

--- PAGE 25 matched=['crosscutting theme', 'VISION', 'crosscutting'] ---
25       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
Harnessing data 
science and new 
technologies to drive 
scientiﬁc discovery 
and precision health.
Using novel approaches 
for addressing health 
disparities and tackling 
their biological 
underpinnings for heart, 
lung, and blood diseases 
and sleep disorders. 
Furthering the 
science on the 
importance of 
lifestyle behaviors.
Leveraging the 
power of community 
and patient 
engagement.
Supporting 
women’s health 
through 
the lifespan.
COMPELLING QUESTIONS AND CRITICAL CHALLENGES 
Compelling questions and critical challenges are conceptual tools that help us more  
deeply explore challenges and opportunities related to the goals, objectives, and  
crosscutting themes.  
• Compelling Questions are unanswered questions or poorly understood areas of
research that require broad NHLBI support because their complexity exceeds the
capacity of any one investigator-initiated program.
• Critical Challenges are barriers or impediments to scientific progress that, if
overcome, will result in significant advances in biomedical knowledge.
There are 139 Compelling Questions and Critical Challenges outlined in the Strategic Vision. 
Approximately 110 are adjusted from the 2016 NHLBI Strategic Vision and 29 are new areas 
of inquiry. 
In the pages that follow, we dive more deeply into the eight objectives, explain their importance, 
and propose how pursuing them has the potential to reduce the public health burden of HLBS 
diseases and disorders.

--- PAGE 26 matched=['OBJECTIVE 1', 'VISION'] ---
26       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
OBJECTIVE 1 •  Understand normal biological function and resilience  
Understanding normal biology is the backbone of all biomedical science. It is essential to 
understanding how the internal body keeps itself stable, predicting how biological systems 
respond to their environment, and recognizing disease pathways and targets for intervention. 
Research on normal biological function — including topics such as circadian rhythms, the 
microbiome, and tissue development from progenitor cells — can help us better define health  
and understand the earliest origins of disease processes. The scope of research on normal biology 
ranges from single cell analytics to studies of entire healthy populations. Using gold standard 
and emerging tools, methodologies, and technologies, such research can uncover the biological 
factors, behaviors, lifestyle factors, social circumstances, and environmental exposures that help 
people become resilient, which they must be to stay well as they age, experience stress, and 
endure adversity. Gaining new knowledge about the body’s intrinsic capacity to repair itself will 
yield greater insight into the transition from health to disease. For these reasons, understanding 
normal biology must remain a cornerstone of NHLBI-funded research.
ENVISION A FUTURE IN WHICH WE CAN
• Pr omote resilience and healthy aging through the application of regenerative strategies
using cells (e.g., progenitor cells) that enable the repair of HLBS systems.
• Characterize the molecular signatures of healthy heart, lung, and blood systems across
the lifespan, and develop early warning systems for molecular perturbations that lead
to disease.
• Pursue integrative analysis of large-scale data to characterize the molecular signature
of the heart, blood, lung, and blood systems that sustain health and wellness. This
data can include information derived from longitudinal electronic health records [EHR],
imaging and functional tests, and multiomics by emerging systems biology, artificial
intelligence, and machine learning.
• Understand how weather, and environmental exposures, social, environmental
exposures, social determinants, behaviors (e.g., diet and physical activity), and genetic
factors modulate biological systems, such as the epigenome, microbiome, and immune
systems, to sustain health and promote resilience.
NORMAL BIOLOGY

--- PAGE 27 matched=['VISION'] ---
27       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
1.CQ.01 How are normal cell functions regulated by complex gene networks and  
cell-to-cell interactions?
1.CQ.02
What are the key molecular and structural mechanisms that allow single cells and  
tissues to sense, integrate, and respond to mechanical cues and influences at local  
and systemic levels?
1.CQ.03
What are the molecular, developmental, hormonal, and behavioral mechanisms and 
psychological, social, and environmental factors — evaluated with a systems biology 
integrative approach — involved in regulating HLBS function and maintaining healthy 
weight across the lifespan?
1.CQ.04
What are the mechanisms and range of normal physiologic responses to environmental, 
neuropsychiatric, social, and other stimuli that predict homeostatic resilience or transition 
to HLBS diseases across the lifespan?
1.CQ.05 What innate and adaptive immune system mechanisms promote HLBS health and prevent 
the development of HLBS diseases?
1.CQ.06 How do specific lymphatic immune and nonimmune circulatory functions interact with  
and contribute to HLBS health, resilience, and disease?
1.CQ.07 What is the influence of the microbiome (including virome and fungome) on HLBS health 
and resilience, including developmental processes, across the lifespan?
1.CQ.08 What are the pathways underlying the effects of circadian function, synchronization, and 
harmonization on HLBS health and resilience across the lifespan?
1.CQ.09
Does circadian regulation modify the effects of environmental exposures (e.g., cigarette 
smoke, vaping, particulates, pathogens, temperature, humidity) on mechanisms of HLBS 
function?
NORMAL BIOLOGY

--- PAGE 28 matched=['VISION'] ---
28       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
1.CQ.010
What are the mechanisms that underlie adaptation in HLBS systems due to place, extreme 
conditions, occupational exposures, weather patterns, and how can this knowledge be used 
to develop novel interventions that optimize health or prevent disease?
1.CQ.11
What are the basic mechanisms that direct the interactions of blood cells with each other 
and their environment, how do these interactions influence their function, and how can this 
understanding be used to optimize the handling of blood cells?
1.CQ.12 What is the normal molecular and cellular heterogeneity in HLBS health and what indicates 
the transition to disease? 
1.CQ.13 What “omic” signatures describe the normal vasculome of the different vascular beds and 
different arteries (elastic vs. muscular) that supply HLBS tissues and organs?
1.CQ.14
What are the biological mechanisms and risks affecting resilience to HLBS conditions, and 
how do these mechanisms differ between women and men with the biological changes that 
occur across the lifespan?
NORMAL BIOLOGY
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
1.CC.01
Reliable and diverse investigational models that reflect individual characteristics, including 
based on variation in sex-based differences, are needed to reproduce normal functioning  
of HLBS systems and to reflect the activities of molecular targets in those systems and 
related diseases.
1.CC.02
Standardized protocols are needed to establish and maintain cultured cell lines and 
organoids relevant to functional studies of HLBS systems. Specifically, facilitating the 
availability of hard-to-culture cell lines and cells from female research subjects, expanding 
the number of HLBS cell lines, and improving reproducibility across studies are necessary. 
1.CC.03
Further advancement and application of comprehensive single-cell biology analytics are 
needed to facilitate an integrated understanding of cellular diversity, cell interactions, and 
cellular phenomena in HLBS health and disease risk. 

--- PAGE 29 matched=['VISION'] ---
29       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
1.CC.04
Advances in measurement methods and models for assessing and characterizing multiple 
and longitudinal exposures (e.g., pre/postnatal, environmental, dietary, social) are needed  
to improve research on normal biologic function and resilience in HLBS.
1.CC.05 A fundamental understanding of the roles of post-translational modifications
(e.g., methylation, ubiquitination, glycosylation, etc.) in HLBS health is needed.
1.CC.06
Dietary assessment methodologies that combine objective measures and biomarkers 
of dietary intake are needed to identify dietary patterns and food constituents that 
contribute to healthy weight maintenance and to inform intervention strategies to lower 
cardiometabolic risks.
1.CC.07
New investigative tools and knowledge of structural and matrix biology are needed to better 
understand injury, regeneration, and repair of the normal (or developing) heart, lung, and 
blood tissues and to enable regenerative medicine. 
1.CC.08 An understanding of the biological HLBS functions and resilience in the context of aging and 
senescence during HIV infection and exposure to antiretroviral therapy.
NORMAL BIOLOGY

--- PAGE 30 matched=['OBJECTIVE 2', 'VISION'] ---
30       NHLBI STRA TEGIC VISION   |    FY  2026–2030
OBJECTIVE 2 •  Investigate newly discovered pathobiological mechanisms important  
to the onset and progression of heart, lung, and blood diseases and sleep disorders   
Discovering new pathobiological mechanisms and understanding them is critical to improving HLBS 
health. Such discoveries and research can potentially lead to clinical and implementation studies, 
which in turn can inform new therapeutic strategies and clinical practice. Important areas to focus 
on, with the help of emerging technologies such as molecular imaging and nanotechnology, include 
mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of rare and common diseases, disease-related structural 
and functional changes, and the clinical significance of these changes. In addition, tracking disease 
onset and progression across the lifespan is essential because it has the potential to inform 
our understanding of how chronic conditions become acute disease and how early exposures 
(environmental, etc.) and interventions, including lifestyle changes, impact health. 
ENVISION A FUTURE IN WHICH WE CAN
• Pr eempt the transition from health to disease and enable disease prevention through
an enhanced understanding of the pathobiological mechanisms underpinning the early
onset of heart, lung, and blood diseases and sleep disorders.
• Leverage high-throughput multiomics and other advanced technologies for deep
phenotyping in longitudinal cohort studies to define the functional significance of genetic
and epigenetic variants on human pathobiology, as well as their impact on clinical outcomes
involving heart, lung, and blood diseases and sleep disorders across the lifespan.
• Gain new insights into modifier genes and molecular pathways that influence the
variable clinical manifestations and outcomes of monogenic disorders (e.g., sickle
cell disease and cystic fibrosis) and structural defects (e.g., congenital heart disease),
thereby catalyzing new tailored therapeutic strategies.
• Identify commonalities underlying disparate heart, lung, and blood diseases and sleep
disorders to understand shared pathways and to identify shared therapeutic targets.
• Leverage emerging human complex tissue and three-dimensional cellular systems
to model the pathobiological processes and to identify targetable molecular/cellular
pathways that drive the onset and progression of heart, lung, and blood diseases and
sleep disorders.
PATHOLOGY, ONSET, & PROGRESSION OF HLBS DISEASES AND DISORDERS

--- PAGE 31 matched=['VISION'] ---
31       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
PATHOLOGY, ONSET, & PROGRESSION OF HLBS DISEASES AND DISORDERS
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
2.CQ.01
What biomarkers of acute and chronic environmental exposures are predictive of disease 
onset or progression? What biologic effects measured by real-time monitoring by these 
biomarkers are irreversible responses and which are opportunities for intervention?
2.CQ.02 How do endogenous stem/progenitor cells and defects in these cells contribute to the  
onset and progression of chronic HLBS diseases?
2.CQ.03
What is the pathobiology of aberrant calcification of coronary arteries, heart valves,  
and peripheral arteries, and why is calcification associated with a poor prognosis in  
HLBS diseases?
2.CQ.04
What interdependencies between the brain/peripheral nervous system and the HLBS 
systems are important to the development, progression, manifestation, and treatment  
of HLBS diseases?
2.CQ.05 What are the mechanisms whereby social conditions and psychosocial stress contributing  
to the onset, progression, and morbidity of HLBS systems?
2.CQ.06
Interdependencies of heart and lung disorders; How do existing lung disorders affect  
CVS morbidity and how does heart disease affect lung function and disease susceptibility 
(e.g., mechanisms whereby congestive heart failure causes lung remodeling and leads,  
in end-stage disease, to right ventricular failure)?
2.CQ.07 What pathobiology underlies vascular causes of cognitive decline? What early interventions 
could target this pathobiology to maintain cognitive function?
2.CQ.08
What is the pathobiology of fibrosis that accounts for its organ specificity (often affecting  
the lungs, heart, or bone marrow alone), its progression in the absence of apparent stimuli, 
and its resistance to drug therapy?
2.CQ.09 What is the pathophysiology of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF),  
and how can this condition be better diagnosed and treated?

--- PAGE 32 matched=['VISION'] ---
32       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
PATHOLOGY, ONSET, & PROGRESSION OF HLBS DISEASES AND DISORDERS
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
2.CQ.10
What are the pathobiological mechanisms underlying HLBS-related pregnancy 
complications? What are the diagnostic, predictive, or therapeutic biomarkers for  
these conditions?
2.CQ.11
How can a better understanding of the molecular and physiological mechanisms  
of hypothermia help differentiate beneficial hypothermia from uncontrolled  
shock-induced hypothermia?
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
2.CC.01
Development and application of comprehensive single-cell biology analytics are needed to 
facilitate an integrated understanding of cellular diversity, cell-cell interactions, and cellular 
phenomena in HLBS health and disease risk. 

--- PAGE 33 matched=['OBJECTIVE 3', 'VISION'] ---
33       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
OBJECTIVE 3 • Investigate factors that account for differences in health status  
among populations
Variations exist between populations — grouped by factors such as age, sex, race, and ancestry—
in susceptibility and resilience to heart, lung, and blood diseases and disorders as well as in 
disease course and outcomes. Although some of these variations are caused by genetic and 
other biological factors, a wide range of environmental and behavioral factors and socioeconomic 
inequities also contribute to health disparities. Research is needed to better understand the 
causes of population health differences and to identify strategies to effectively address them. 
Investigations in this area may range from basic laboratory studies to environmental and 
population science to community-centered implementation research.
ENVISION A FUTURE IN WHICH WE CAN
• Lev erage a deeper understanding of biologic differences related to sex or ancestral
groups (e.g., variation in ancestry leading to differences in asthma phenotypes among
ethnic subgroups) to devise more precise, targeted intervention strategies and to
further improve clinical outcomes.
• Leverage epidemiology and the power of data science, artificial intelligence, and
machine learning to understand and reduce sex-, race-, ethnicity-, and location-related
health disparities.
• Incorporate measures of diet and nutrition inequities, and health disparities in research
on heart, lung, and blood disease and sleep disorders across the lifespan, using
existing longitudinal cohorts, innovative designs for collecting exposure data, big data
approaches, individual biospecimens, and imaging using
remote digital technologies.
HEALTH STATUS

--- PAGE 34 matched=['VISION'] ---
34       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
3.CQ.01
How can community-engaged, late-stage translational research reduce the time needed 
to increase the adaptation, adoption, scale-up, and sustainment of evidence-based 
interventions that address the local context (including social, structural, legal, and 
environmental factors) in communities that experience inequities in HLBS health?
3.CQ.02
How can we improve the representation in clinical studies of individuals from all 
communities, and effectively engage communities as research partners to ensure that 
findings are relevant to everyone?
3.CQ.03
What are the determinants (environmental, structural, social, genetic, and epigenetic) of the 
inequities in HLBS health and the behavioral, molecular, cellular, and systemic mechanisms 
that result in these differences? 
3.CQ.04
What factors render individuals or populations subjected to the same exposures (e.g.,
lifestyle behaviors, environment, psychosocial) more resilient or susceptible to HLBS
diseases across the lifespan?
3.CQ.05 What are the critical lifestyle behaviors among diverse populations that affect HLBS health 
and the potential differential impacts of these behaviors on HLBS health? 
3.CQ.06
How can we develop, test, and implement culturally appropriate and community- 
informed effective interventions that will have a substantial impact on HLBS health  
in diverse populations?
3.CQ.07
With the goal of identifying targets and interventions to mitigate inequities, what are the 
upstream structural factors (social, economic and legal forces, systems, and policies)  
and historical influences that contribute to inequities in the prevention, management,  
and treatment of HLBS conditions? 
HEALTH STATUS

--- PAGE 35 matched=['VISION'] ---
35       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
3.CC.01 Novel experimental methods and tools are needed to evaluate the effect of biological sex 
differences across the lifespan on HLBS health, resilience, and diseases. 
3.CC.02
Precision prevention (i.e., personalized prevention within community needs) of HLBS 
conditions and achieving health equity requires interdisciplinary teams, advanced data 
science tools and analytics, diverse data sources (e.g., exposome, genetic, epigenetic, 
“omic”), and an inclusive research environment.
3.CC.03
Advances in methods and models for assessing and characterizing exposures (e.g., lifestyle 
behaviors, environmental, social exposures) and the differential effects of exposures over 
the life course are needed to understand the differences in HLBS health among populations.
3.CC.04
Syndemic framework-based, collaborative/multidisciplinary research is needed on HIV-
associated comorbidities, coinfections, and complications in HLBS, including how social, 
cultural, economic, political, behavioral, and other factors, create the conditions that 
lead to the clustering of HLBS conditions among people with HIV, and how these factors 
differentially affect people with HIV (e.g., urban vs. rural, low vs. high socioeconomic status).
3.CC.05
Build trust-based and respectful partnerships with various communities that experience 
disparities in health to enhance inclusive and diverse participation in clinical research on 
HLBS disorders.
3.CC.06 Novel approaches that facilitate the engagement of underrepresented populations in all 
stages of research, particularly when planning interventions are critically needed. 
3.CC.07
To understand the collective impact of place (including climate and environmental factors 
such as air quality), structural factors, and health behaviors on HLBS inequities, advanced 
data methods and analytical tools are needed, including relevant short-term outcome 
measures that predict the long-term impact on these entrenched inequities.
3.CC.08
Studies and systems that modify disparity-driving SDOH, including structural factors and 
barriers in health research and healthcare systems need to be designed, conducted and 
implemented. And their subsequent impact on health measured.
HEALTH STATUS

--- PAGE 36 matched=['OBJECTIVE 4', 'VISION'] ---
36       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
OBJECTIVE 4 • Identify factors that account for individual differences in pathobiology 
and in response to treatments 
Research advances in areas such as genomics and other “omics” (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics) 
have provided new opportunities to deepen our understanding of HLBS pathobiological processes 
and how they vary among individual patients by sex and other factors. Accelerating progress 
toward precise, individualized prevention efforts and medical interventions will require research 
into biological factors, environmental exposures, behavioral factors, and other influences that 
account for differences in pathobiology and unique responses to treatment (including drug 
reactions and other adverse events). This research will allow personal and clinical decisions, 
practices, and medical products to be tailored to the individual patient to help produce the best 
possible outcomes.
ENVISION A FUTURE IN WHICH WE CAN
• Dev elop precise clinical interventions across the lifespan by sex and based on
an individual’s environmental exposures, behaviors, genotypes, and
molecular-cellular phenotypes.
• Accelerate the incorporation of new imaging, omics, and sensor technologies with
advanced data analytics to inform a more precise clinical classification of chronic
diseases and acute conditions (e.g., asthma, pulmonary fibrosis, chronic obstructive
lung disease, heart failure, myocardial infarction), and enable more accurate diagnosis
and treatment.
• Develop and define individual HLBS health signatures by integrating all reliable and
available data (e.g., genome-wide association studies (GWAS), multiomics, genetic and
non-genetic information, social/environmental factors) to guide personalized prevention
strategies and clinical interventions.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PATHOBIOLOGY

--- PAGE 37 matched=['VISION'] ---
37       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PATHOBIOLOGY
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
4.CQ.01
Which phenotypic, biomarker, and molecular characteristics predict outcomes and, when 
applied in clinical studies, predict differential responses to therapy in individuals and in 
different populations with HLBS diseases? A specific focus area is the functional assays 
to validate millions of genetic variants to identify novel drug targets via understanding 
the biological mechanisms underlying differential HLBS diseases and to develop simple/
affordable diagnostic tools to be deployed in outpatient settings. 
4.CQ.02
What factors render individuals or populations subjected to the same exposures (e.g., diet, 
smoking, other environmental and social exposures) resilient or susceptible to disease? 
This needs to include mental exposures in the form of psychological and social stress and 
internal exposures in microbiome. Sex, race, and lifespan events must be considered to 
understand individuals’ responses to the exposures.
4.CQ.03
What underlies secondary resilience, such that some people are protected from the 
complications of HLBS diseases? Since the secondary resilience changes over an 
individual’s lifespan, high-impact life events must be considered, such as menopausal 
transition and its impact on cardiopulmonary health and sleep disorders. 
4.CQ.04
Which patients benefit from rehabilitation treatments (e.g., cardiac, vascular, pulmonary), 
and how can the benefits of rehabilitation treatments be sustained long term? The impact of 
environmental and omics profiles should be considered, and special attention should also 
focus on sex and race differences in responding to the treatment.
4.CQ.05
How does the pathobiology that underlies nonobstructive ischemic heart disease and 
the associated risks for acute coronary syndrome and early mortality differ between 
subpopulations, and what are the targets for treatment and prevention?
4.CQ.06 What tests would identify individuals who are at high risk of venous thromboembolic events 
and who would benefit from targeted risk factor modification and/or intensive prophylaxis?
4.CQ.07
What are biomarkers of pulmonary hypertension that could better identify individuals at 
high risk, reveal underlying mechanisms, and guide treatment? For instance, considering 
pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) predominantly affects women, what sex-specific 
risks (e.g., rurality, conventional, SDOH, mental health, societal constraints, menopausal 
status, adverse pregnancy outcomes) across the lifespan enable epigenetic analyses to 
understand susceptibility and pathways for prevention, resilience, or successful aging.
4.CQ.08 What are the major determinants of individual and sex differences in breathing patterns in 
sleep, susceptibility to insomnia, and other sleep behaviors?

--- PAGE 38 matched=['VISION'] ---
38       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
4.CQ.09
What genetic biomarkers, genetic comparisons across ethnic groups, and environmental 
predictors of sickle cell disease risk would help inform and improve management of the 
disease’s progression and its complications.
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
4.CC.01
Predictive modeling and prevention trials are needed in populations at high risk for  
highly prevalent HLBS diseases. The advancement in environmental and omics profiles 
of HLBS diseases should be leveraged to enable early prediction/prevention for high-
risk individuals and to minimize trial and errors during the development of therapeutic 
treatment of HLBS diseases. 
4.CC.02
Greater use of advanced technologies in precision medicine research is needed to 
accelerate investigations of HLBS disease mechanisms and the development of targeted 
treatments for complex HLBS diseases. 
4.CC.03
Clinical evaluation tools are needed to differentiate patients with atherosclerotic heart 
disease who will progress to myocardial infarction or with sudden cardiac death from those 
with stable disease. 
4.CC.04
Portable, wearable technologies tailored for women that capture real-time, continuous 
individual data with minimal interference, need to be promoted. The data from these 
technologies should be objectively surveilled and should capture critical risks of 
HLBS diseases, such as blood pressure and blood sugar, arrhythmias, asthma/COPD 
exacerbation, behaviors, and adverse stressors. Such data would enable investigations of 
risks and adverse maternal outcomes.
4.CC.05 Ethical, legal, and social implications of patient privacy and data security, racial and cultural 
factors, and diversity in precision medicine research need to be considered.
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN PATHOBIOLOGY

--- PAGE 39 matched=['OBJECTIVE 5', 'VISION'] ---
39       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
OBJECTIVE 5 • Develop and optimize novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies  
to prevent, treat, and cure heart, lung, and blood diseases and sleep disorders
Recent scientific and technological developments offer especially promising opportunities 
to prevent disease, manage and treat illness, and promote resilience. These wide-ranging 
developments include new gene editing techniques to safely treat and prevent HLBS diseases  
and disorders, smart tools that monitor and adjust biological processes, techniques that  
modulate stem cell or immune system signaling to reduce disease risk, and advances in  
materials science that could yield vastly improved implant devices. Other technologies and 
bioengineering developments may further facilitate diagnostic capabilities. New lifestyle 
interventions may improve the maintenance of continued health and wellness and may enable 
behavioral modification to prevent disease. Many of these advances, which are the results of  
past investments in basic research, are crucial to developing and optimizing novel diagnostics  
and therapeutics strategies.   
ENVISION A FUTURE IN WHICH WE CAN
• Dev elop surgical grafts (using stem cells, 3D printing, and nanotechnologies) for
children born with heart defects, in which the grafts grow and adapt into adulthood,
making multiple operations unnecessary.
• Transform the safety and availability of the nation’s blood supply by using genetically
engineered stem cells to eliminate histoincompatible antigens and generate universal
donor red blood cells that are available off the shelf by a high-throughput process.
• Build intelligent health systems for HLBS diseases and disorders that use artificial
intelligence and machine learning tools that can screen patients for risk factors
for early disease development and that can diagnose and evaluate the effects of
interventions and treatments.
• Create biomimetic platforms that promote lung tissue regrowth, regeneration, repair,
and replacement of a patient’s individual lung cells and/or tissues to reduce the burden
of underlying lung diseases.
DIAGNOSTIC AND THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES

--- PAGE 40 matched=['VISION'] ---
40       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
DIAGNOSTIC AND THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
5.CQ.01
Would reduction of known cardiac and vascular risk factors during childhood and 
adolescence translate into the prevention or delayed development of atherosclerosis  
and other heart diseases?
5.CQ.02 Would interventions in pregnancy or early childhood designed to modulate immune 
development result in primary prevention of asthma?
5.CQ.03
How should the management of diseases that typically develop in childhood (including 
childhood interstitial lung disease, hemoglobinopathies, congenital heart disease, cystic 
fibrosis, and asthma) be modified as affected individuals mature into adulthood?
5.CQ.04
How does applying lifestyle interventions (diet, nutrition, exercise) as a part of routine 
patient care in a variety of contexts—from community to patient care settings—help  
manage or prevent lung function decline in the general population and patients with  
chronic lung diseases?
5.CQ.05
How do we apply circadian-based strategies (e.g., sleep, timing of medication, meals,  
device monitoring) to improve the efficacy of treatments for HLBS diseases  
(e.g., hypertension, asthma, thrombosis, obesity/diabetes)?
5.CQ.06
What technical improvements in the collection, preparation, storage, and processing  
of blood and synthetic blood products would improve their potency, safety, and lifespan?  
What animal model improvements are needed for hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers 
(HBOC) studies to accelerate improvements in blood products? 
5.CQ.07
What effective and implementable practices (e.g., recognition and initial response by the 
community, emergency medical response, hospital-based care) would reduce the rate of 
mortality associated with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest?
5.CQ.08 What new interventions or surgical tools are needed to achieve, with minimal symptoms, 
the optimal clinical management for patients with severe calcific aortic stenosis?
5.CQ.09
In patients with enhanced cardiovascular risk due to comorbidities from chronic diseases 
(e.g., HLBS disorders, diabetes) and multiple drug therapies (including cancer survivors), 
what new biomarkers are needed to help predict at-risk patients, improve outcomes, and 
help guide treatment management?

--- PAGE 41 matched=['VISION'] ---
41       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
DIAGNOSTIC AND THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
5.CQ.10
What are the underlying risk factors to predict early complications versus resilience after 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)? What are the mechanisms for efficiency 
of differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)? How can these consequences be 
predicted and prevented to reduce the high rates of mortality following HSCT? 
5.CQ.11
How can we “reprogram” the immune system to improve outcomes of allogeneic cell 
therapies, tissue and organ transplants, and regenerative strategies and to diminish 
allogeneic responses to essential biologic replacement therapies?
5.CQ.12 How do we develop and implement novel strategies to prevent and treat minor and major 
hemorrhagic complications in individuals affected by acquired and inherited disorders?
5.CQ.13
How can targeted manipulation of epigenetic modifications (distinct from global 
suppression of histone acetylation or DNA methylation) become a useful strategy  
for therapeutic intervention in chronic cardiopulmonary or blood diseases? 
5.CQ.14
Do interventions to improve ventilation during sleep decrease morbidity and mortality in 
individuals with either heart failure (or other diseases associated with chronic hypoxemia) 
and sleep-disordered breathing?
5.CQ.15
How can alterations of stem cell cycles and other therapies, as well as endogenous 
mechanisms, be harnessed to promote repair and regeneration of the heart, lung, and  
blood systems?
5.CQ.16 How can we better integrate palliative care concepts, such as respect for personal values, 
goals, and treatment preferences, in the management of patients with HLBS diseases?
5.CQ.17 Can strategies targeting lung and airway progenitor cells be used for early diagnosis, 
prevention, and treatment of chronic obstructive lung diseases in high-risk populations?

--- PAGE 42 matched=['VISION'] ---
42       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
5.CC.01
An understanding of the immune system from a systems biology perspective is needed  
to design more efficacious treatment strategies for chronic inflammatory and autoimmune 
HLBS diseases. 
5.CC.02 Improved capabilities for responding rapidly and effectively to emerging infectious threats 
to the safety and availability of the nation’s blood supply are needed. 
5.CC.03 Robust tools and algorithms are needed to evaluate objective biomarkers of sleep health 
and dysfunction. 
5.CC.04
New materials and constructs that are electrically, chemically, and mechanically  
active are needed to enable the development of self-adjusting bioengineered implants  
(e.g., synthetic/biomimetic tools, bioprinted tissues relevant to HLBS).
5.CC.05
Development of safe, well-functioning designer platelets and red blood cells from stem
or progenitor cells, as well as the large-scale production of these products, is needed for
therapeutic and diagnostic uses.
5.CC.06
A variety of smart devices are needed that both monitor physiology and integrate data from 
the digital health devices into clinical decision-making and empower patients’ self-care and 
HLBS disease management.
5.CC.07
Optimization of ventricular assist devices for HLBS to incorporate better percutaneous  
and transcutaneous systems and to improve battery and charging-mechanism designs  
is needed.
5.CC.08 A more rapid translation of new discoveries about molecular, cellular, and tissue-based 
mechanisms of better therapeutic and preventive strategies for HLBS diseases is needed. 
5.CC.09
Understanding overlapping etiology and pathogenesis, such as chronic inflammation, 
immune dysfunction and aging, and microbiome/virome contributions, that promote 
HIV-associated comorbidities and complications affecting HLBS systems to enable the 
development of novel interventions for the prevention, control, and treatment of such 
comorbidities and complications is needed.
DIAGNOSTIC AND THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES

--- PAGE 43 matched=['VISION'] ---
43       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
5.CC.10
Safer and more efficacious hematopoietic stem cell and gene therapy approaches 
to eliminate HIV reservoir, cure HIV infection, and improve immune system restoration  
are needed.
5.CC.11 Improved infrastructure and workforce expertise in HLBS-related biomanufacturing  
is needed.
5.CC.12
Comprehensive analysis of clinical, imaging, and multiomics data using artificial intelligence 
and machine learning needs to be leveraged to identify disease endotypes and to develop 
endotype-specific personalized disease-modifying interventions for HLBS disorders.
5.CC.13
Comprehensive analysis of multiomics/bioinformatics and advanced imaging data using 
artificial intelligence and machine learning need to be leveraged to discover the biomarkers 
of the onset of chronic obstructive lung diseases and cardiovascular diseases in smokers 
and to develop strategies that prevent disease onset and progress. 
DIAGNOSTIC AND THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES

--- PAGE 44 matched=['OBJECTIVE 6', 'VISION'] ---
44       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
OBJECTIVE 6 • Optimize clinical and implementation research to improve health 
and reduce disease
For maximum return on NHLBI investments in research and research training, it is important 
to prioritize strategies that support integration of evidence-based interventions within clinical 
and public health settings. New methodologies, research frameworks, and resources must be 
developed to refine the conduct of clinical studies and implementation research, while also 
improving the overall efficiency, effectiveness, and impact of the research enterprise. Current 
challenges include recruiting research participants of all backgrounds, effectively research 
participants, effectively translating knowledge gained from these studies into programs and 
policies that improve health at the clinic and community levels, and engaging in a strategic, 
meaningful, and sustainable way with community partners at every stage of the research 
process to build trust and enhance the impact of this research. Commitment to addressing 
these challenges is paramount, as is the careful attention to building and nurturing meaningful 
and sustainable community-engaged research partnerships, especially in communities 
disproportionately burdened by health disparities. Also important are multi-, inter-, and 
transdisciplinary collaborations that make the most of clinical and implementation  
research efforts.  
ENVISION A FUTURE IN WHICH WE CAN
• Easil y and safely link EHRs and personal health data (e.g., from patient-reported
outcomes and wearables) to help streamline clinical research and empower research
volunteers to self-identify.
• Accelerate the translation of discovery into practice by leveraging HLBS research
platforms (e.g., clinical epidemiology registries, clinical trial networks, implementation
science programs) to engage the clinical care and patient communities; leverage the
use of EHRs, patient registries, and existing datasets; and create a seamless interface
between clinical research and practice.
• Build sustainable community partnerships to support research and advance
health equity.
IMPROVE HEALTH

--- PAGE 45 matched=['VISION'] ---
45       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
ENVISION A FUTURE IN WHICH WE CAN
• Implement str ategies for widespread access (e.g., in rural settings and at safety net
hospitals, primary care facilities, and community health centers) to real-time health
education and to prevention and disease monitoring tools, using telemedicine and
remote monitoring devices that help improve health outcomes for individuals with
HLBS diseases and disorders.
• Design scalable strategies for integrating and sustaining proven-effective interventions
in communities where they are needed the most.
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
6.CQ.01
What approaches (methods, such as community engagement, or technologies) are effective 
for raising awareness and participation in clinical research across diverse population 
groups and across the lifespan, and how can we incorporate these approaches in clinical 
trial design?
6.CQ.02 What clinical trial designs are best to investigate factors responsible for variation in 
individual responses to pharmacological and other interventions?
6.CQ.03
How can we engage all interested, affected, and/or relevant parties (e.g., patients, 
providers, health systems, regulatory bodies) to improve the clinical research enterprise by 
addressing critical regulatory, operational, and fiscal needs to enhance efficiency and make 
evidence-based interventions equitably accessible and affordable?
6.CQ.04
How can we use dissemination and implementation science to identify, develop, and test 
strategies to improve awareness and access to evidence-based diagnostics, prevention 
practices, and therapeutics, including emerging approaches to care, to speed up, and to 
maximize generalizable knowledge and use of effective strategies?
IMPROVE HEALTH

--- PAGE 46 matched=['VISION'] ---
46       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
6.CC.01
Meaningful, diverse, and inclusive collaboration and engagement among researchers 
from various backgrounds and all academic levels and disciplines (e.g., basic science, 
translational scientists, implementation scientists; clinicians; population scientists, 
engineers, bioinformatics experts, data scientists) and sectors (e.g., nonprofit organizations, 
industry), including community members, are needed to enhance and expedite advances  
in HLBS research and turn discovery into health. 
6.CC.02
Skills development and training, as well as new methods, are needed to improve the 
navigation of preclinical new product phases within the context of the entire clinical 
translational science continuum to speed the pipeline from discovery to impact. 
6.CC.03
Expanded resources for identifying therapeutic targets and agents, establishing  
proof of concept, and developing data for investigational new product applications  
are needed across the lifespan to enable the early translation of research findings  
to clinical applications. 
6.CC.04 Creative approaches to clinical trials in rare HLBS diseases are needed across the lifespan 
to successfully test strategies that will expand preventive and therapeutic options. 
6.CC.05
Novel methodologies and improvements in existing methodologies are needed for 
dissemination and implementation research that explores uptake of research findings into 
approaches, programs, and policies to yield practical, actionable evidence.
6.CC.06
Multidisciplinary, multinational, multilevel partnerships are needed to develop effective and 
sustainable strategies for combating chronic HLBS disorders in low- and middle-income 
countries, which take into account the highly variable local epidemiology of HLBS disorders, 
the need for novel approaches to reducing disease burden, and the implementation 
challenges inherent in under-resourced settings. 
6.CC.07
Increased support is needed for implementation and dissemination research to facilitate 
the adaption and scale-up of proven interventions in community and clinical settings for 
the prevention, control, and treatment of HIV-associated HLBS comorbidities, coinfections, 
and complications across the lifespan, especially among vulnerable and underserved 
populations who often have limited access to care.
6.CC.08
Insights on costs, resources to support partnerships, and the means of financing successful 
dissemination and implementation strategies are needed to enable the understanding 
of short-term and long-term investments necessary to support systemwide integration, 
sustainable use, and possible adaptation of successful implementation strategies. 
IMPROVE HEALTH

--- PAGE 47 matched=['VISION'] ---
47       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
6.CC.09
There is a need to engage and support a broader diversity of institutions, communities, 
and sectors, including the primary care sector, in clinical trials through enhanced clinical 
research infrastructure domestically and globally to drive inclusive participation across 
multiple dimensions (race, ethnicity, geography, socioeconomic status) to enhance relevance 
and impact of HLBS science.
6.CC.10 Enhanced efficiency, cost containment, data sharing, and scientific rigor of clinical
research of living, labor, and technologies and community engaged research are needed.
6.CC.11 Clinical research infrastructure support is needed to enable the rapid implementation
and conduct of clinical trials in a diverse setting (including low resource/primary care).
IMPROVE HEALTH

--- PAGE 48 matched=['OBJECTIVE 7', 'VISION'] ---
48       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
OBJECTIVE 7 • Leverage emerging opportunities in data science to open new 
frontiers in research on heart, lung, and blood diseases and sleep disorders
New technologies — from omics platforms to high-throughput screening — have generated  
vast amounts of data that have the potential to provide new insights into the preemption  
and precise treatment of HLBS diseases and disorders. Unfortunately, only a small portion  
of these datasets are being optimally assessed and incorporated into practice. Additional 
consideration must be given to the ethical, legal, and social implications of artificial intelligence 
use and data-sharing approaches in disease diagnosis and management. Developing innovative 
approaches to the integration, analysis, and interpretation of data from multiple sources will 
be essential. This information can then be effectively used to understand biological, social, 
environmental, and behavioral determinants associated with HLBS health and disease and  
to improve patient outcomes. 
ENVISION A FUTURE IN WHICH WE CAN
• A ccelerate the discovery of mediators of health and disease through the seamless
and shared use of readily accessible cloud-based datasets that integrate genomics
and other omics analyses with carefully phenotyped research participant data from
diverse sources.
• Develop handheld devices to process and integrate genomics and clinical and personal
health data at the bedside to assist clinicians in their care of patients.
• Leverage the NHLBI BioData Catalyst, NHLBI biorepositories, and other data resources
to evaluate emerging therapeutics for HLBS diseases and disorders using cutting-edge
data science, bioinformatics, and synthetic biology techniques.
• Integrate data resources to create a digital lung, which incorporates the molecular,
cellular, pathophysiology, and physical dynamics of the lung to gain a better
understanding of chronic lung disease and to develop data-driven treatment strategies.
DATA SCIENCE

--- PAGE 49 matched=['VISION'] ---
49       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
7.CQ.01
As the research enterprise evolves to include large multimodal datasets, how can we 
train multidisciplinary teams about topics such as biostatistics, computer science, and 
bioinformatics, so they can tackle some of the most challenging and complex HLBS 
research questions? 
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
7.CC.01
The development, application, and sharing of robust and multidimensional data-analytical 
and theoretical methods, mathematical modeling, and computational simulation techniques 
are needed for understanding fundamental mechanisms of HLBS systems, including 
gene, protein, and metabolic regulatory networks, and the impact of environmental 
exposures on those networks. 
7.CC.02
Novel integrative systems biology and analytical approaches are needed to exploit 
the wealth of data coming from genetics, epigenetics, transcriptomics, metabolomics, 
proteomics, environmental exposures, SDOH, electronic health records, and imaging to 
define disease subtypes, predict risks, and identify therapeutic targets.
7.CC.03
Novel analytical approaches, coordinated access to data, well-planned sample
analyses, and the creation of a scientific data commons are needed to leverage existing
deeply phenotyped cohorts and accelerate translational research to promote the
discovery of key druggable targets and the development of novel and precise treatments
for HLBS diseases.
7.CC.04
Advancements are needed in the organization, infrastructure, integration, and  
availability of multimodal data, including imaging, EHR, and wearable data, and omics  
data, including genetic, epigenetic, transcriptomic, metabolomic, proteomic, phenotypic,  
and ontological information.
7.CC.05
Bold new data science methods, including artificial intelligence and machine learning 
approaches, are needed to improve the analysis of big data, including population, trial,  
and cohort research.
7.CC.06
Advanced analytic methodologies should be used to efficiently and rapidly leverage existing 
contextual, pragmatic, administrative, and original datasets to address critical challenges 
such as methods, measures, generalizable knowledge, scale, and spread of effective 
implementation strategies.
7.CC.07
Multimodal analyses of data from a variety of sources (e.g., registry data, molecular, 
social, behavioral, environmental exposures, wearable sensor, self-reported data) are  
needed to develop predictive and actionable models for understanding the risk, prevention, 
and treatment of HLBS disorders.
DATA SCIENCE

--- PAGE 50 matched=['OBJECTIVE 8', 'VISION', 'mission'] ---
50       NHLBI STRA TEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
OBJECTIVE 8 • Further develop and sustain a scientific workforce capable of 
accomplishing NHLBI’s mission 
New approaches are needed to ensure the continued development of a scientific workforce of 
diverse disciplines and backgrounds, equipped with relevant skills, knowledge, and resources 
to tackle future HLBS challenges. This goal will require strategic interventions throughout the 
research career continuum, which spans across K to 12 education, collegiate and postdoctoral 
studies, and career development from early investigator to senior scientist. Collaborative 
partnerships will be crucial to successfully expanding the exposure of young students to the 
wonders of science and sustaining their interest through college and graduate education. 
Embracing research training as a lifelong exploration of scientific curiosity will also remain 
critical, as will the NIH’s continued promotion of new scientific disciplines, tools, and technologies 
that keep pace with an ever-changing biomedical and public health landscape.   
ENVISION A FUTURE IN WHICH WE CAN
• Enable inno vative solutions to pressing health problems by promoting the use
of multidisciplinary teams capable of leveraging diverse skills and perspectives
from crosscutting research fields such as data science, computational biology,
bioengineering, quantitative population sciences, behavioral science, and
implementation science.
• Build an NHLBI workforce and research portfolio that reflect the widest possible range
of scientific thinking, perspectives, backgrounds, and lived experiences.
• Continually train the research workforce across all career stages in evidence-based
science, cutting-edge methodologies, and emerging areas of research.
• Educate students from diverse backgrounds about biomedical research-related careers
and encourage their pursuit of those careers through earlier introduction to research
opportunities and scientific advancements.
• Quickly identify and address the barriers facing the growth of the next generation of
researchers, particularly in lung and sleep science and the data sciences.
FURTHER DEVELOP , DIVERSIFY, AND SUSTAIN

--- PAGE 51 matched=['VISION'] ---
51       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
FURTHER DEVELOP , DIVERSIFY, AND SUSTAIN
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
8.CQ.01
What kinds of exposures, beginning in early education, would stimulate and maintain 
students’ understanding and interest in science, particularly students from diverse  
and disadvantaged backgrounds?
8.CQ.02
How can we build and sustain a diverse HLBS scientific workforce that includes people 
from different groups and from all regions of the county, especially those from rural,  
disadvantaged, and underserved communities?
8.CQ.03
How can research training programs be tailored to attract and retain researchers with 
cultural competency to address health challenges through a scientific lens that includes 
location and neighborhood- and community-level SDOH that contribute to health disparities 
and outcomes?
8.CQ.04
What are the best strategies to develop a scientifically diverse workforce across the full 
spectrum of investigative approaches — from basic to clinical, clinical to practice, and 
population to health implementation science — to address health inequities and disparities, 
including those of women’s health, domestically and globally?
8.CQ.05
How do we ensure that HLBS trainees across the career continuum are aware of and 
prepared for a variety of possible scientific career opportunities (e.g., careers in teaching, 
industry, government)?
8.CQ.06
How do we best develop a scientific workforce that is fluent in product development and 
commercialization issues, including regulatory, intellectual property, and business issues, 
in order to bring products for HLBS indications to the market?
8.CQ.07
How do we attract students to, and support trainees in, traditional basic science disciplines 
(e.g., biochemistry, physiology, pharmacology, integrative biology, data science) in order 
to address research topics that are important to the NHLBI and to advance emerging fields 
of science?
8.CQ.08
How do we add communication skills to our training programs to improve scientists’
messaging with the public so they can better promote health, disseminate scientific 
advances, and counter misinformation?

--- PAGE 52 matched=['VISION'] ---
52       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
COMPELLING QUESTIONS
8.CQ.09
How can we harness virtual technologies to expand collaboration, foster creative mentoring, 
and expand access to advanced instruction and remote learning, to address the needs of  
the modern and future biomedical workforce in the United States and globally?
8.CQ.10
How can we better incorporate interdisciplinary and team science in our training and  
career development programs to prepare scientists for collaborative research and  
for using emerging technologies and resources? How do we also improve cross-
communication between scientists in different fields to convey and appreciate  
the importance of each other’s research for more effective teams?
8.CQ.11
How can we encourage senior scientists to collaborate with or mentor early career 
investigators to develop new research programs and support the independence of  
emerging leaders in their field?
8.CQ.12 How can community healthcare workers be better educated about scientific advances to  
improve care in underserved communities?
8.CQ.13
How can we increase participation of nonphysician clinicians, such as nurses, advanced 
practice providers, clinical psychologists, social workers, veterinarians, dentists, and  
others, in our training programs and research workforce as a whole?
FURTHER DEVELOP , DIVERSIFY, AND SUSTAIN

--- PAGE 53 matched=['VISION'] ---
53       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
8.CC.01
Sufficient numbers of clinical scientists are needed, particularly those interested in 
pursuing the translation of breakthroughs from basic science laboratories into clinical 
settings. Research training opportunities are needed for all stages of clinical training, 
beginning early in their professional education.
8.CC.02 Programs of training, professional development, and mentoring are needed to help create  
a more diverse cadre of senior leaders in science and medicine. 
8.CC.03
Training that emphasizes rigorous scientific methods in the biomedical, behavioral, social, 
data, and implementation sciences is required to increase reliability and reproducibility of 
research findings.
8.CC.04
Better support is needed for scientists who are making transitions between career stages 
(e.g., the graduate/medical education stage, the postdoctoral/fellowship period, the junior 
investigator stage, first independent clinical trial for clinical investigators).
8.CC.05 Curricula and resources for education of healthcare workers in evidence-based care  
are needed. 
8.CC.06
Improved methods for standardized collection and analysis of education, employment,  
and productivity data from HLBS scientists over the course of their careers are needed  
to assess defined metrics and predictors of success at both individual and training  
program levels.
8.CC.07 More early career investigators need to be recruited and supported, and the success of 
those interested in research on HIV and HLBS sciences needs to be facilitated.
8.CC.08
Training opportunities need to be increased for investigators across the career span in 
emerging areas of research, particularly in the use of artificial intelligence and machine 
learning, and other data science approaches to facilitate the analysis of increasingly large 
biomedical datasets.
FURTHER DEVELOP , DIVERSIFY, AND SUSTAIN

--- PAGE 54 matched=['VISION'] ---
54       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
CRITICAL CHALLENGES
8.CC.09
Scientists across all career/life stages, especially women who more often experience 
challenging and disruptive life events, need to be better supported through research 
training, career development, and capacity building initiatives.
8.CC.10 The pool of postdoctoral fellows who qualify for National Research Service Award
(NRSA) training programs needs to be expanded.
FURTHER DEVELOP , DIVERSIFY, AND SUSTAIN

--- PAGE 55 matched=['VISION'] ---
55       NHLBI STRATEGIC VISION   |    FY 2026–2030
APPENDIX I

