# NIAAA (FY2024-2028) — file: NIAAA_Strategic_Plan_FY2024-2028.pdf
# 32 pages matched priority-heading patterns


--- PAGE 1 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism Strategic Plan:  
Fiscal Years 2024–2028 
Advancing Alcohol Research to Promote Health 
and Well-Being  

--- PAGE 2 matched=['Research Themes', 'Goal 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 i 
Table of Contents 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse  and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: .................................. 1 
Fiscal Years 2024–2028 ................................................................................................................ 1 
Director’s Message ....................................................................................................................... 1 
Introduction to the Strategic Plan ............................................................................................... 2 
Structure of the Strategic Plan .................................................................................................. 2 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Mission ................................................... 2 
Statutory Authority ..................................................................................................................... 2 
Institute Organization................................................................................................................. 2 
Strategic Planning Process ....................................................................................................... 3 
Strategic Plan Implementation and Monitoring ......................................................................... 3 
Cross-Cutting Research Themes ................................................................................................ 3 
Advancing Research on Women’s Health ................................................................................ 4 
Applying a Life Course Approach to Alcohol Research ........................................................... 5 
Encouraging a Whole Person, Integrated Approach to Health ................................................ 5 
Innovating Alcohol Research and Care Through Data Science .............................................. 5 
Cross-Cutting Research Programs ............................................................................................ 6 
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders ............................................................................................ 6 
Alcohol and HIV ......................................................................................................................... 8 
Research Goals ........................................................................................................................... 10 
Goal 1: Elucidate the Biological Mechanisms and Consequences of Alcohol Misuse .......... 10 
Goal 2: Identify Patterns, Trends, and Public Health Impact of Alcohol Misuse ................... 15 
Goal 3: Prevent and Reduce Alcohol Misuse, Alcohol Use Disorder, and Associated 
Consequences ......................................................................................................................... 17 
Goal 4: Improve Diagnosis and Expand Treatment of Alcohol Use Disorder and Alcohol-
Related Conditions .................................................................................................................. 20 
Supporting the Mission .............................................................................................................. 25 
Goal 1: Building a Robust Research Capacity ....................................................................... 25 
Goal 2: Serving as a Responsible Steward of the Public’s

--- PAGE 3 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 1 
Director’s Message 
Alcohol-related problems exact an immense toll on individuals, families, 
and communities. In the United States, more than 178,000 people die per 
year from alcohol misuse, making alcohol a leading preventable cause of 
death.1 From the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2019 through 
2021, alcohol-related deaths increased approximately 38%, far outpacing 
previous increases of around 2% per year.2 Alcohol-related traffic fatalities 
increased by 14% from 2020 to 2021, their highest level since 2009.3  
Alcohol misuse is linked to more than 200 diseases and injury-related 
conditions—including approximately 50% of liver disease deaths, 5% to 6% 
of cancer cases, and 4% of cancer deaths—and contributes substantially 
to health care costs and lost productivity.4,5 The adverse effects of alcohol are extensive and impact 
health in ways that many people may not realize. In addition, nearly 30 million people in the United States 
have alcohol use disorder (AUD), and less than 10% of them receive treatment or help.6,7 
The mission of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) is to generate and 
disseminate fundamental knowledge about the adverse effects of alcohol on health and well-being and to 
apply that knowledge to improve the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of alcohol-related problems, 
including AUD, across the life course. For more than 50 years, NIAAA has been at the forefront of 
cutting-edge alcohol research that has significantly expanded our understanding of the factors that 
contribute to alcohol-related problems and the mechanisms through which they develop.  
Thanks to NIAAA-supported research, AUD is widely regarded as a treatable chronic disorder stemming 
from various genetic and environmental factors, like many other common chronic health conditions. 
Accumulating evidence demonstrating the health risks of alcohol at all levels, along with the recent 
cultural shift around sober curiosity in the United States, have provided NIAAA new opportunities to lead 
the changing conversation around alcohol.  
We have developed and promoted materials which help individuals and communities reevaluate their 
relationship with alcohol, and change how alcohol-related health issues are perceived and addressed in 
health care. These efforts, supported by advances in basic, translational, and clinical research, are 
leading to more effective prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of alcohol misuse and are helping to 
reduce stigma associated with alcohol-related problems as well as the stigma associated with choosing 
not to drink.  
NIAAA’s strategic plan charts a course for the next five years as we seek to address alcohol research 
challenges while maintaining flexibility to address emerging research opportunities and urgent public 
health needs. Preventing alcohol misuse at all ages, enhancing the diagnosis of AUD, fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorders (FASD), and other alcohol-associated pathologies, improving treatment for these 
conditions, and addressing health disparities in alcohol misuse and related consequences are just some 
of NIAAA’s most salient goals. I am optimistic that NIAAA-supported research will pave the way for future 
breakthroughs that will help more Americans live healthier, more productive lives. 
George F. Koob, Ph.D. 
Director 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alc

--- PAGE 4 matched=['research \nthemes', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
Introduction to the Strategic Plan 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 2 
Structure of the Strategic Plan 
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) Strategic Plan Fiscal Years 2024–2028 
d
escribes research goals, themes, and programs that support the NIAAA mission. These goals also 
complement other National Institutes of Health (NIH) strategic plans and U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) initiatives. 
Four research goals represent long-standing pillars of NIAAA-supported research. Cross-cutting research 
themes represent high-priority concepts and emergent research opportunities that cut across the four 
research goals. Cross-cutting research programs describe coordinated programs with elements that span 
the four research goals. In addition to conducting and funding research, NIAAA has established capacity 
and operational priorities toward sustaining robust research capabilities, practicing good scientific 
stewardship, and strengthening the reach and impact of NIAAA-supported research.  
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Mission  
NIAAA’s mission is to generate and disseminate fundamental knowledge about the adverse effects of 
alcohol on health and well-being and to apply that knowledge to improve diagnosis, prevention, and 
treatment of alcohol-related problems, including alcohol use disorder (AUD), across the life span.  
Today, NIAAA is the world’s largest funder of alcohol research. NIAAA provides leadership in the national 
effort to reduce alcohol-related problems by:  
• Conducting and supporting alcohol-related research in a wide range of scientific areas, including 
neuroscience and behavior, epidemiology and prevention, treatment and recovery, and metabolism 
and health effects 
• Coordinating and collaborating with other research institutes and federal programs on  
alcohol-related issues 
• Collaborating with institutions (including international, national, state, and local), organizations, 
agencies, and programs engaged in alcohol-related work  
• Translating and disseminating research findings to health care providers, researchers, policymakers, 
and the public 
Statutory Authority 
As established by the Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Prevention, Treatment, and 
Rehabilitation Act of 1970, NIAAA’s mission is to “develop and conduct comprehensive health, education, 
training, research, and planning programs for the prevention and treatment of alcohol abuse and 
alcoholism.” Visit the History of NIAAA webpage to learn more about NIAAA’s major milestones. 
Institute Organization 
NIAAA is one of the 27 Institutes and Centers (ICs) of NIH, a component of HHS. NIH is the foremost 
federal agency for funding biomedical research in the United States. 
NIAAA’s organizational structure includes the Office of the Director, which sets research, programmatic, 
and institute-wide priorities in collaboration with NIAAA offices and research divisions. NIAAA offices 

--- PAGE 5 matched=['Research Themes', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 3 
include the Office of Extramural Activities, the Office of Science Policy and Communications, and the 
Office of Resource Management. NIAAA’s intramural research division, the Division of Intramural Clinical 
and Biological Research, conducts cutting-edge alcohol research and promotes research training. 
NIAAA’s four extramural research divisions—the Division of Epidemiology and Prevention Research,  
the Division of Metabolism and Health Effects, the Division of Neuroscience and Behavior, and the 
Division of Treatment and Recovery—develop, plan, and coordinate multidisciplinary research and 
research training in a wide range of scientific areas essential to NIAAA’s mission.  
Strategic Planning Process 
NIAAA’s strategic planning process considers the long-term priorities of the field while remaining flexible 
to adapt to emerging public health needs and scientific opportunities. It also considers a dynamic balance 
of basic, translational, and clinical research relevant to NIAAA’s broad mission. Although NIAAA engages 
in formal strategic planning, the institute continually assesses and refines priorities as the science and 
public health landscape evolves. 
To initiate its strategic planning process, NIAAA formed a strategic plan working group comprising staff 
from the NIAAA Office of Science Policy and Communications in 2020. This group convened meetings 
with NIAAA leadership and all NIAAA offices and divisions to develop an overall framework for the new 
strategic plan. Additionally, two listening sessions were held with extramural and intramural staff to 
provide input on the process and utility of the strategic plan. These sessions were followed by meetings 
with each NIAAA research division, which was asked to identify research needs and opportunities related 
to its scientific areas. Their feedback, with input from NIAAA leadership, formed the basis of an outline 
representing the draft strategic plan framework.  
A request for information (RFI) inviting public comment on the draft framework was issued in 2021. RFI 
responses were received from researchers, advocacy groups, professional societies, and others. The 
results were summarized in a report to the National Advisory Council on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism in 
September 2021. The outline was refined based on the RFI feedback and Council input and was followed 
by writing of the strategic plan in consultation with NIAAA leadership, offices, and research divisions. 
The final NIAAA Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 represents a collaborative effort of NIAAA 
leadership, NIAAA staff across the institute, and the National Advisory Council on Alcohol Abuse  
and Alcoholism. 
Strategic Plan Implementation and Monitoring  
Over the next five years, NIAAA will monitor progress on its goals and research priorities. NIAAA’s ability 
to pursue its research goals and priorities is supported by its commitment to building a robust research 
capacity and serving as a responsible steward of the public’s investment. This strategic plan is a living 
document that is responsive to public health challenges as well as to changes in the scientific landscape.  
Cross-Cutting Research Themes  
NIAAA has identified cross-cutting research themes, which provide a lens for examining high-priority 
topics that span two or more of the research goals outlined in this strategic plan. The following

--- PAGE 6 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'Mission'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 4 
complement the Cross-Cutting Research Programs and Supporting the Mission sections of this  
strategic plan. 
Advancing Research on Women’s Health  
Alcohol use among women is a growing public health concern. Alcohol use is increasing among women 
older than age 26. For the first time, adolescent and young women (ages 12–20) are drinking—and binge 
drinking—more than men. A substantial body of evidence suggests that women who drink are at a higher 
risk of adverse alcohol-related pathology and consequences than men who drink. These include faster 
progression of AUD, blackouts, liver disease, heart disease, cognitive deficits, and certain cancers, 
among other effects.  
Research also suggests that pathways to alcohol misuse may differ between women and men. Women 
experience stress and trauma more frequently than men, and alcohol is often used to cope with 
psychological distress. Unfortunately, health care providers are less likely to screen for alcohol misuse 
and provide interventions to women compared to men. 
To improve the health of women, NIAAA will continue to support biological and behavioral research to 
more fully understand how alcohol use and misuse impact women and to develop interventions tailored to 
the unique needs of women. This includes studies on health issues that affect young women, including 
the etiology, prevention, and treatment of alcohol misuse. Research is needed to elucidate sex 
differences in the mechanisms contributing to alcohol’s adverse effects on the brain, other organs,  
and body systems, and how these mechanistic differences can reveal novel targets for prevention and 
treatment of alcohol-related harms. More research is also needed to identify the risk and protective 
factors that contribute to alcohol-associated health outcomes among women to inform the development 
of prevention and treatment interventions.  
Given the contribution of alcohol to many health conditions, NIAAA will encourage innovative studies to 
enhance understanding of the relationships between alcohol misuse and common comorbidities, such as 
mental health conditions and other acute and chronic health conditions. New research to improve 
implementation and coordination of evidence-based care for alcohol problems across settings, including 
prenatal care, and across components of health systems will be essential for improving the health and 
well-being of women. NIAAA will pursue collaboration with the NIH Office of Research on Women’s 
Health and partners across NIH to advance integrated research in women’s health. 

--- PAGE 7 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 5 
Applying a Life Course Approach to Alcohol Research  
Biological, behavioral, social, and environmental 
changes that occur throughout life influence the 
emergence and progression of alcohol misuse and its 
associated health consequences. A life course 
approach that takes these changes into account can 
inform research on the development of interventions 
and resources tailored to the specific needs of 
individuals and populations.  
NIAAA encourages research to address critical 
knowledge gaps about the impact of alcohol misuse 
unique to each life stage to facilitate improved 
prevention, identification, and treatment of alcohol-
related problems. 
Encouraging a Whole Person, Integrated Approach to Health  
Alcohol misuse contributes to many acute and chronic health conditions, and impacts health in ways  
that individuals and health care providers may not realize. The relationship between alcohol and  
so many elements of health underscores the importance of addressing alcohol misuse in the context  
of whole person health. Whole person health looks at the connections across biological, behavioral, 
social, and environmental domains of health to address disease, and is supported by integrated 
approaches to care. For example, integrating alcohol screening, brief intervention, and referral to 
treatment (SBIRT) in routine health care can increase the chances that an alcohol-related problem is 
identified and addressed, and can help clinicians identify other physical and mental health-related issues 
affected by alcohol misuse.  
Integrating treatment for AUD and alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD) holds promise for promoting 
recovery from both conditions and for contributing to the long-term survival of patients. Using the 
integration of care between AUD and ALD as an example, future work should emphasize opportunities to 
integrate care for alcohol misuse and other pathophysiologies exacerbated or caused by alcohol, such as 
sleep disorders, pain, and stress- and mood-related disorders.  
A better understanding of the mechanistic and clinical relationships between alcohol misuse and 
commonly co-occurring mental and physiological conditions could lead to novel, integrated strategies that 
improve the prevention of, early diagnosis of, treatment of, and long-term recovery from these conditions. 
Delving into the health determinants that influence these relationships will also provide valuable insights 
towards these goals. NIAAA encourages innovative basic, translational, and clinical research that 
enhances the understanding of whole person health and facilitates integrated care to improve health 
outcomes and reduce health care costs. 
Innovating Alcohol Research and Care Through Data Science 
In 2019, prior to the mandatory NIH Data Management and Sharing Policy, NIAAA established a new 
repository for data generated by NIAAA-funded studies in humans, the NIAAA Data Archive, housed 
within the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Data Archive. This growing archive will eventually 
contain data from thousands of NIAAA-funded studies, which will be made available to the research 

--- PAGE 8 matched=['Research Themes', 'Objective 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 6 
community. In addition to facilitating rigor and reproducibility of research, the NIAAA Data Archive  
will provide a rich resource for secondary analyses—a strategy that supports the optimal use of  
research resources.  
Artificial intelligence (AI) will be critical for developing new statistical and analytical models for alcohol 
research. Such new models will be important for real-time data analysis, prediction, automated tools for 
data harmonization and management, and the generation of interactive tools for the prevention of alcohol 
misuse, individualized AUD treatment, and guidance of recovery. In particular, multi-omic approaches 
combined with data science approaches also hold promise for identifying biomarkers or algorithms of 
biomarkers that could help predict vulnerability to alcohol misuse, individualize AUD treatment,  
and guide recovery. 
Cross-Cutting Research Programs 
Cross-cutting research programs are NIAAA-managed research portfolios that include topics spanning 
multiple research goals outlined in this strategic plan. These programs complement the Cross-Cutting 
Research Themes and Supporting the Mission sections of this strategic plan. 
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders  
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD) represent 
the broad range of neurodevelopmental impairments 
and other physical effects that result from prenatal 
exposure to alcohol. NIAAA supports a robust FASD 
research program to advance study of the causes, 
mechanisms, diagnosis, prevention, and treatment  
of FASD.  
Research to reduce stigma around prenatal alcohol 
exposure, to increase education and awareness of 
FASD, and to develop prevention strategies are 
important components of FASD prevention. Basic 
research on the biological mechanisms that underlie 
prenatal alcohol exposure and contribute to FASD 
can lead to the identification of diagnostic biomarkers as well as potential treatment targets, paving the 
way for earlier diagnosis and treatment. NIAAA is also facilitating efforts to reach consensus on a single 
research classification system for FASD to harmonize research efforts across the globe and accelerate 
scientific progress.  
Objective 1: Advance the Prevention of Prenatal Alcohol Exposure  
Preventing and reducing alcohol use during pregnancy is essential to preventing prenatal alcohol 
exposure and related consequences, including FASD. Studies have shown that alcohol SBIRT 
approaches are an effective tool for addressing alcohol and other substance use in primary and prenatal 
care settings.  
NIAAA encourages research and other activities to prevent and reduce prenatal alcohol exposure and the 
prevalence of FASD—for example: 

--- PAGE 9 matched=['Objective 2', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 7 
• Designing and evaluating cost-effective models to help women at high risk of having a child with 
FASD (i.e., who misuse alcohol, have AUD, or already have another child with FASD) to reduce  
or abstain from drinking during pregnancy and, consequently, reduce the incidence of FASD 
• Developing interventions to prevent alcohol-exposed pregnancies 
• Improving implementation and enhancing scalability of effective preventive interventions  
(e.g., alcohol SBIRT) for alcohol misuse and its negative consequences in women  
• Identifying the causes of FASD-related stigma and exploring strategies to reduce it in order to 
improve prevention efforts 
• Promoting collaboration with federal and nonfederal organizations to raise public awareness  
about FASD and advance implementation of prevention interventions in various clinical and 
nonclinical settings 
Objective 2: Improve Early Identification and Treatment Interventions for Fetal Alcohol 
Spectrum Disorders  
Improved diagnostic techniques for FASD could enable more accurate diagnosis, expand access to 
assessment for FASD, allow for earlier intervention, and likely reduce costs and overall burden of  
FASD across the life span. Early identification holds promise for better outcomes, but limited availability 
of FASD diagnostic services remains a barrier to care.  
NIAAA encourages research to enhance FASD screening, diagnosis, and treatment—for example: 
• Improving implementation of existing evidence-based FASD diagnostic approaches across the life 
span as well as early intervention and care for individuals with FASD across a range of populations 
and settings, such as for children and parents in the child welfare system and individuals in the 
juvenile justice system 
• Developing novel technologies and methods to facilitate earlier identification of children affected by 
prenatal alcohol exposure, as early as the fetal and newborn periods 
• Assessing combinations of evidence-based therapeutic approaches for individuals with FASD 
• Understanding and addressing health disparities concerning prenatal alcohol exposure in  
different populations 
• Developing and evaluating novel prenatal and postnatal therapeutic approaches, medications,  
and dietary supplements to combat prenatal alcohol exposure and FASD 
• Pursuing various interventions to mitigate the neurocognitive and behavioral deficits associated with 
FASD across the life span 
Objective 3: Identify Mechanisms, Diagnostic Biomarkers, and Potential Treatment Targets 
for Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders  
Alcohol can disrupt prenatal development through a variety of mechanisms. Understanding the biological 
effects of prenatal alcohol exposure that emerge across the life span, from prenatal development to 
adulthood, can inform preventive and therapeutic strategies to mitigate the consequences of prenatal 
alcohol exposure.  

--- PAGE 10 matched=['Objective 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 8 
NIAAA encourages research to advance foundational knowledge of the mechanisms mediating 
FASD—for example:  
• Identifying and characterizing the biological mechanisms underlying the harmful effects of prenatal
alcohol exposure across the life span, including health consequences that persist or emerge in adults
with FASD
• Further defining periods of susceptibility to alcohol exposure (e.g., periconception, specific months
or trimester, entire pregnancy, or time points during postnatal development)
• Elucidating the potential paternal contribution to the etiology of FASD
• Refining and advancing biomarkers of prenatal alcohol exposure
• Defining the long-term health impacts of prenatal alcohol exposure in later adulthood
Alcohol and HIV 
Alcohol is an important contributor to the HIV pandemic. In the United States, many people with HIV 
engage in alcohol misuse or have AUD. Alcohol can affect behaviors that increase the likelihood of 
acquiring or transmitting HIV to others. Alcohol may also speed HIV progression in people living with the 
disease, influence their engagement and retention in HIV treatment, and increase their susceptibility to 
organ damage and coinfections. These effects may shift across the life span, particularly as people living 
with HIV enter midlife and older adulthood.  
In coordination with the NIH Office of AIDS Research and the NIH Strategic Plan for HIV and HIV-Related 
Research, NIAAA continues to advance basic, translational, and clinical research to improve health 
outcomes among people living with HIV, including those who experience health disparities. NIAAA will 
enhance collaboration with partners within and outside NIH to translate and disseminate research 
findings to maximize the public health impact of NIAAA-supported HIV research, and to strengthen the 
research and workforce capacity to sustain alcohol-HIV research.
Objective 1: Understand the Biological and Behavioral Mechanisms of Alcohol Misuse 
and HIV 
The mechanisms through which alcohol misuse interacts with HIV to increase morbidity and mortality are 
not well understood. While HIV can be treated effectively with antiretroviral medications, alcohol misuse 
contributes to or exacerbates adverse medication interactions, chronic inflammation, liver and other 
organ injury, cardiovascular and neurological problems, and other pathologies.  
Several biological or behavioral phenotypes of HIV and alcohol have been identified that may have 
markedly different disease courses, biological underpinnings, and treatment responses. Collaborative, 
multidisciplinary research will be key to better understanding the interactions between alcohol misuse  
and HIV. 
NIAAA encourages research to better understand the relationship between alcohol misuse and HIV to 
inform the development of effective interventions—for example:  
• Determining how alcohol misuse confers a biological risk for HIV infection
• Determining how current and past alcohol misuse in the context of HIV infection and the use of
antiretroviral medications affect HIV disease progression and the development of organ and tissue
injury (e.g., gut, liver, lung, and brain)

--- PAGE 11 matched=['Objective 2', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 9 
• Improving the understanding of the biological, clinical, and socio-behavioral aspects of aging through
the lens of HIV infection and alcohol misuse
Objective 2: Prevent Alcohol Misuse and Treat Alcohol Use Disorder Among People Living 
With HIV or at High Risk of Acquiring HIV  
As noted above, alcohol misuse contributes to poor health outcomes among people living with HIV and 
reduces the effectiveness of strategies designed to prevent new HIV infections. For example, the use of 
pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is highly effective in preventing HIV among those at high risk. However, 
alcohol misuse may reduce a person’s likelihood of following PrEP medication regimens.  
Alcohol misuse may also affect an individual’s adherence to antiretroviral therapy and contribute to HIV 
transmission. Evidence-based approaches, such as brief interventions, contingency management, risk 
and harm reduction interventions, and stepped care approaches, have been demonstrated to prevent and 
reduce alcohol misuse among people living with HIV. Stepped care approaches that integrate treatment 
for alcohol misuse and HIV have also been shown to improve HIV-related outcomes. Strategies to 
identify and address alcohol misuse among people with HIV or at high risk for HIV can contribute to 
improved health and a reduced incidence of HIV.  
NIAAA encourages alcohol-related research to prevent and reduce HIV infection, progression, 
and transmission—for example:  
• Enhancing routine alcohol SBIRT to reduce HIV transmission and disease progression
• Developing strategies that address alcohol-related barriers to effective use of PrEP, especially
among women and other populations with historically low usage rates
• Developing novel interventions and enhancing implementation of existing evidence-based prevention
and treatment interventions that address both alcohol misuse and HIV
• Expanding access to and options for AUD treatment for people living with HIV
Objective 3: Address Alcohol-Related Comorbidities Among People Living With HIV 
Many comorbidities, coinfections, and medical complications are associated with chronic alcohol misuse 
and HIV disease progression. These factors combine with the natural processes of aging to increase 
frailty and present challenges for medical management. Addressing comorbid medical complications is 
critical for improving quality of life and longevity. 
NIAAA encourages research to address alcohol-related comorbidity among individuals with HIV— 
for example:  
• Promoting the integration of care for HIV, alcohol misuse or AUD, and co-occurring health conditions
and medical complications in different settings
• Developing a comprehensive model for alcohol misuse or AUD and disease outcomes among older
adults with HIV, including expanded biomarker assays
• Evaluating the efficacy and effectiveness of interventions for reducing alcohol misuse in improving
co-occurring pain, stress, and other mental health concerns among people living with HIV

--- PAGE 12 matched=['Research Themes', 'Goal 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 10 
Research Goals 
This strategic plan includes four major goals, which cover the depth and breadth of research necessary 
to improve the understanding of and to address the effects of alcohol misuse on individuals and society. 
These goals complement the Cross-Cutting Research Themes, Cross-Cutting Research Programs, and 
Supporting the Mission sections of this strategic plan. 
Goal 1: Elucidate the Biological Mechanisms and Consequences of 
Alcohol Misuse 
Alcohol misuse has powerful effects on the brain and 
behavior. Neuroscience research has characterized the 
short-term impact of alcohol on brain activity and the 
adaptations in brain structure and function that occur as 
individuals progress from occasional, controlled alcohol 
use to alcohol misuse and AUD. This work has made 
major strides in shedding light on the neurotransmitter 
systems and neurobiological mechanisms that are altered by alcohol and that contribute to the 
development of alcohol misuse and AUD. Equally important, neuroscience advances are laying the 
foundation for understanding the individual differences that drive alcohol misuse across the life span. 
Innovative research to elucidate the biological mechanisms of alcohol-associated pathology and recovery 
within a neurobiological framework can reveal novel opportunities for more effective prevention, 
diagnosis, and treatment of alcohol misuse and AUD. 
Alcohol misuse also has powerful effects beyond the brain and can damage nearly every organ system  
in the human body. While the liver is the primary site of alcohol metabolism and is susceptible to alcohol-
associated injury and disease, alcohol misuse is a significant contributor to pancreatitis, cardiovascular 
disease, cancer, and other health conditions. Additionally, alcohol misuse can negatively impact the 
complex interactions between organ systems. For example, research demonstrates that alcohol-related 
neurobiological changes may not be due entirely to the direct actions of alcohol on the brain but may be 
med
iated partially through interactions with the gastrointestinal tract, liver, and endocrine system.  
Basic, translational, and clinical research is needed to better characterize the mechanisms through which 
alcohol misuse damages the body’s organ systems and leads to, and exacerbates, chronic disease.  
Additionally, understanding the biological mechanisms underlying the effects of prenatal alcohol 
exposure, from prenatal development to adulthood, and understanding other medical challenges, such as 
HIV/AIDS, can inform preventive, diagnostic, and therapeutic strategies to improve health outcomes. See 
the Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders and Alcohol and HIV discussions within the Cross-Cutting 
Research Programs section for more information on these specific research areas. 
Goal 1 research topics are integrally linked to the Cross-Cutting Research Themes. Exa mples of NIAAA 
research priorities in this area include the following objectives. 
NIAAA’s Long-Term Vision 
To comprehensively understand the 
biological processes affected by alcohol 
misuse to inform the prevention, diagnosis, 
and treatment of alcohol-related problems. 
NIAAA aims to advance research on the effects of alcohol on the brain and other organs, organ 
systems, and tissues. This research includes an integrative approach to understand the brain cells and 
misuse and physiologica

--- PAGE 13 matched=['Objective 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 11 
Objective 1: Explore the Neurobiological Mechanisms of Alcohol Misuse and Alcohol 
Use Disorder 
The addiction cycle is a validated heuristic framework for 
understanding the development, progression, and 
heterogeneity of AUD. The framework is based on 
dysregulation in three functional and neurocircuitry domains: 
incentive salience (reward drinking), negative emotional states 
(relief drinking),  
and executive function (loss of control). Drinking to cope with 
stress has received renewed attention as a major driver of 
alcohol misuse and AUD, and has emphasized the role of 
negative emotionality (also known as hyperkatifeia) as a 
target for treatment.  
The COVID-19 pandemic further exacerbated the role of 
stress in alcohol misuse. NIAAA- supported research on the 
relationships between alcohol misuse and stress has yielded 
new insights into the neurotransmitter and neurocircuit 
dynamics that underlie excessive alcohol use and relapse, as 
well as the negative emotional states and executive function 
deficits associated with the addiction cycle. These studies 
have also shed light on the role of neuroinflammation and sex 
differences in mediating AUD and stress-related behaviors, as 
well as the bidirectional relationship between alcohol misuse 
and other co-occurring behavioral health disorders.  
Life stage is a key factor that influences how alcohol impacts 
brain function. For example, research has demonstrated that alcohol misuse can impact the delicate 
balance of brain development that occurs during adolescence and continues into a person’s mid-20s. 
Additionally, with the rapid increase of the older adult population, the impact of alcohol misuse on the 
aging brain has come into the spotlight. Not only is the prevalence of alcohol misuse and AUD increasing 
among older adults, but alcohol misuse has been associated with a faster cognitive decline and other 
aging-related effects. Research to better understand the neurobiological links between alcohol and age-
related effects on brain health could reveal novel targets for prevention and treatment.   
NIAAA encourages innovative research and integrated approaches to build on existing knowledge of the 
biological mechanisms that mediate alcohol misuse across the life span and at all levels of the addiction 
cycle. Some specific examples of high-priority research gaps include: 
• Identifying molecular, cellular, and functional brain connectivity that underlies the development of,
maintenance of, return to, and recovery from alcohol misuse and AUD, using animal models, human
imaging studies, and multilevel translational approaches—such multilevel analyses may include
modern neurobiological techniques from
single-cell physiology to computational neuroscience and AI approaches across species
• Characterizing the dynamic interactions of extraneuronal contributors to alcohol misuse and AUD,
including the extracellular matrix, neuroimmune cells, perineuronal cells, and peripheral
neuromodulatory targets


--- PAGE 14 matched=['Objective 2', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 12 
• Identifying the roles of interoceptive cues, including autonomic, neuroimmune, and gut microbiome
cues, in alcohol misuse and AUD
• Understanding how factors such as childhood trauma, psychiatric comorbidity, social isolation,
socioeconomic challenges, and health care availability interact with neurobiological mechanisms to
mediate alcohol misuse and AUD
• Elucidating the neurobiological mechanisms that mediate the interactions between alcohol misuse
and cognitive decline, including cognitive decline related to Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias,
in the context of aging
• Examining the mechanisms by which sex differences influence individual differences in the brain’s
response to alcohol as individuals progress from alcohol use to misuse to AUD
• Exploring neuroadaptations as well as other biological measures and/or -omic signatures in
combination with data science approaches to develop diagnostic biomarkers for the prevention,
diagnosis, and treatment of alcohol misuse and AUD
Objective 2: Elucidate the Underlying Mechanisms of Alcohol-Induced Tissue and 
Organ Damage 
Alcohol misuse has devastating effects on organs, systemic health, and life expectancy. Alcohol affects 
many organs and tissues in the body. Alcohol misuse is associated with increased liver disease, 
pancreatitis, cardiomyopathy, lung pathologies, skeletal muscle myopathy, diminished bone strength  
and impaired recovery from trauma, infectious diseases, and several types of cancers (including head 
and neck, esophageal, liver, breast, and colorectal cancers). Alcohol consumption also disrupts  
body-wide systems, specifically the immune system, the endocrine system, and the lymphatic system.  
Research suggests alcohol damage occurs through both shared and tissue- and organ-specific 
mechanisms. For example, alcohol-related dysfunction of the immune system and associated 
inflammation contributes to some, but not all, mechanisms of alcohol-associated organ damage. 
Understanding features of alcohol damage that are unique to specific tissues or organs will inform 
focused prevention and treatment approaches. Identifying specific risk and protective factors could also 
reveal individual differences in targets for prevention and treatment. 
NIAAA encourages research to further characterize the biological factors that contribute to alcohol-
associated damage to the body’s tissues, organs, and organ systems, with an emphasis on research that 
will identify targets for development of effective therapies to prevent and treat these devastating conditions. 
Currently, there are no U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved medications for the treatment of 
alcohol-associated damage to any organ. Examples of NIAAA research priorities in this area include: 
• Investigating mechanisms mediating the susceptibility and development of the following clinically
significant alcohol-associated conditions with the goal of better prevention and treatment of
alcohol-associated conditions: liver disease, pancreatitis, cardiomyopathy, lung disease, skeletal
muscle myopathy, disrupted bone homeostasis, infectious diseases, and cancers
• Exploring tissue-specific molecular, cellular, and systemic responses to alcohol misuse and AUD on
metabolism, inflammation, tissue repair, regeneration, and homeostasis and their contribution to
alcohol-related tissue and organ damage across ages and bio

--- PAGE 15 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 13 
• Characterizing the effects of alcohol’s disruption of components of the immune system on the body’s
defense against infection and related comorbidities
• Exploring alcohol’s effects on organ-organ interactions, such as interactions among gut-liver-brain,
gut-brain axis, gut-lung, and other organ interactions that are still unexplored but clinically relevant

--- PAGE 16 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 14 


--- PAGE 17 matched=['Goal 2', 'Objective 3', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 15 
Objective 3: Enhance Translation of Basic Research Findings to Clinical Practice 
A mechanistic understanding of the conditions that give rise to alcohol misuse and AUD requires work in 
model systems where invasive techniques can be used. Major goals are to translate physiological 
findings derived from preclinical studies into clinical applications for AUD as well as to back translate 
human findings to validate preclinical models for further research.  
Barriers to translation and back translation include different data collection methods, different temporal 
scales, species-specific approaches to behavioral regulation, and lack of biological homology across 
species. Predictions derived from computational modeling approaches can be examined through 
conventional laboratory approaches and provide the basis for developing and testing novel treatment 
strategies. Identifying similar computations employed across species provides a basis for predictive 
models that capture pathologies that underlie alcohol misuse and AUD.  
NIAAA also supports the development and application of complementary methods, models, and 
technologies, along with the integration and translation of data across multiple species and levels of 
analyses, to understand the causes and improve the treatment of AUD and other alcohol-related health 
conditions. The effects of alcohol on tissue can be investigated with defined cellular systems of stem 
cells, induced pluripotent cells, and organoids.  
Examples of research that NIAAA encourages to advance translation include: 
• Developing high-throughput screening models to identify compounds having potential to treat alcohol
misuse, AUD, and alcohol-related organ damage
• Expanding the validation of candidate biomarkers in the discovery phase to improve prevention,
diagnosis, and treatment of alcohol-associated conditions
• Identifying phenotype-specific multi-omic profiles of AUD in the context of alcohol-associated organ
damage that include genomics, proteomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics, and epigenomics to
inform cross-organ analyses in understanding alcohol misuse and AUD
• Conducting back translation studies on mechanisms using molecular genetic approaches, such as
gene editing and stem cell studies, to understand mechanisms for alcohol misuse or organ injury
based on human data for alcohol research
• Expanding computational modeling approaches to provide a basis for predictive models that capture
pathologies that underlie alcohol misuse and AUD
Goal 2: Identify Patterns, Trends, and Public Health Impact of Alcohol Misuse 
NIAAA will continue to support epidemiological research to identify and track patterns of alcohol use and 
misuse, drinking-related outcomes and disparities, and individual and environmental variables that confer 
risk or resilience. 
Epidemiological research is key to addressing the public 
health impact of alcohol misuse. Identifying and tracking 
patterns and trends in alcohol use and related harms 
convey the scale and burden of alcohol misuse in the 
nation. Although significant changes in patterns of 
drinking behavior and consequences have occurred over 
time, it is important to acknowledge that population-level 
NIAAA’s Long-Term Vision 
To gain a complete understanding of the 
patterns and trends of the burden and 
likelihood of alcohol misuse to inform the 
diagnosis, prevention, and treatme

--- PAGE 18 matched=['Research Themes', 'Goal 2', 'Objective 1'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 16 
averages may not reflect the public health impact of alcohol misuse among various sociodemographic 
groups. It is important for epidemiology research to focus on alcohol misuse and related consequences 
among populations that experience health disparities, as well as the general population.  
Epidemiological research also plays a critical role in identifying factors that influence the initiation of 
alcohol use and the progression to alcohol misuse, including heavy drinking and AUD. Knowledge of risk 
factors associated with alcohol misuse can inform prevention and intervention efforts. Similarly, 
epidemiological studies can reveal factors that protect against alcohol misuse and consequences. This 
information can be used to develop prevention strategies that focus on health promotion. 
Goal 2 research topics are integrally linked to the Cross-Cutting Research Themes. Examples of NIAAA 
research priorities in this area include the following objectives.  
Objective 1: Identify and Track Trends in Alcohol Misuse and Related Consequences 
Collection and analysis of national data on alcohol use 
are essential for surveilling the patterns and impact of 
alcohol misuse on public health. For example, recent data 
have revealed some successes, such as declining alcohol 
use among youth. These studies also indicate, however, 
that the recent decrease has been slower among females 
compared to males. Among adults, however, alcohol use 
is increasing, with larger increases found among women, 
Black men, and older adults.  
Each year, approximately 5 million people visit emergency 
departments for alcohol-related reasons, from injuries to 
diseases.8 The rate of alcohol-related deaths in the United 
States more than doubled between 1999 and 2021. Additional epidemiological reports also indicate that 
ALDs, such as cirrhosis, are increasing, particularly among women and young adults, and alcohol now 
accounts for almost half of liver disease deaths in the United States.4 Research tracking the patterns and 
correlates of alcohol involvement in morbidity and mortality can inform decisions about where to direct 
prevention and treatment efforts. 
NIAAA encourages research to understand the scope and scale of alcohol misuse—for example: 
• Identifying patterns, trends, and disparities in alcohol misuse, AUD, alcohol-related consequences, 
as well as treatment access and utilization across demographic groups 
• Characterizing patterns and trends in co-use of alcohol, cannabis, opioids, and other substances and 
their contributions to adverse health and social outcomes 
• Identifying and characterizing secondhand effects of alcohol misuse (e.g., interpersonal violence, 
assault, homicide, child maltreatment, and motor vehicle crashes) 
• Improving assay methodologies for validated biomarkers of alcohol consumption considering cost, 
timeliness, and accessibility in clinical settings 
• Applying innovative data measurement technologies and approaches for more accurate and/or real-
time assessment of alcohol use, related behaviors, and associated changes over time (e.g., 
ecological momentary assessment, biomarkers, and biosensors) 


--- PAGE 19 matched=['Research Themes', 'Goal 3', 'Objective 1'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 17 
• Utilizing cutting-edge data collection and analytic approaches, such as AI, social network  
analyses, and data analytics to study and predict patterns and trends in alcohol misuse to facilitate 
timely intervention 
• Examining the long-term health and societal effects of the increase in alcohol misuse and alcohol-
related consequences due to the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly due to coping with stress  
Goal 3: Prevent and Reduce Alcohol Misuse, Alcohol Use Disorder, and 
Associated Consequences 
NIAAA encourages the development, evaluation, and implementation of individual, family, school, 
community, and policy-based strategies to prevent alcohol misuse, alcohol use disorder, and related 
consequences. 
Evidence-based strategies to prevent and reduce 
alcohol misuse and the associated consequences are 
critical for lessening the resulting individual, social,  
and public health impact. Research is revealing 
opportunities for developing novel prevention 
interventions and improving the effectiveness of  
existing ones. 
Alcohol use commonly begins during adolescence, and the earlier a person starts to drink the more likely 
they are to escalate to alcohol misuse, develop AUD, harm themselves and others while intoxicated, and 
misuse other substances. As such, prevention strategies that seek to delay and prevent alcohol use 
among adolescents are a major focus of the NIAAA research portfolio. 
Similarly, integration of prevention across a variety of health, community, justice, and social service 
settings can increase the reach among underserved populations. These interventions typically occur at 
the individual, family, school, community, and policy levels, and focus on preventing or delaying the 
initiation of alcohol use or preventing escalation to more serious problems. 
Additionally, promoting awareness of FASD, adopting prevention strategies, and evaluating policies that 
also reduce stigma around seeking treatment can support efforts to prevent alcohol use and reduce 
consequences among women who are or may become pregnant. The Cross-Cutting Research Program 
on FASD explores this research area.  
Goal 3 research topics are integrally linked to the Cross-Cutting Research Themes. Examples of NIAAA 
research priorities in this area include the following objectives. 
Objective 1: Increase Utilization of Alcohol Screening and Brief Intervention in  
Different Settings  
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends alcohol screening and brief intervention (SBI) in 
primary care settings for adults ages 18 and older. A data analysis from the National Survey on Drug Use 
and Health showed that although alcohol screening often occurs among people with AUD who have 
utilized health care in the last year, there is still insufficient use of brief intervention or referral to alcohol 
treatment. Research also indicates that not all groups of people are equally likely to be screened or 
receive advice about risks associated with drinking, a practice that may contribute to health disparities.  
NIAAA’s Long-Term Vision 
Develop and implement effective and 
targeted prevention strategies to prevent 
all alcohol-related problems. 

--- PAGE 20 matched=['Objective 2', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 18 
Barriers to SBI are significant but surmountable. The barriers include lack of health care provider time to 
ask questions and respond to harmful drinking behaviors, need for health care provider training for 
efficient and effective alcohol SBI, lack of treatment resources for referral (especially among adolescent 
and minority populations), and impediments to reimbursement of alcohol SBI and referral to treatment. 
For both adolescents and adults, there are relationships between patterns of alcohol use and other risk 
factors for health. Evidence-based screening tools can uncover these risks. For instance, among 
adolescents, certain drinking behaviors are related to the likelihood of having depression and misusing 
opioid pain medications. Thus, in addition to identifying alcohol misuse, alcohol SBI can also help health 
care providers uncover other issues that impact health and well-being. Studies have also suggested that 
training health care providers to conduct SBI reduces stigma toward patients with AUD. 
NIAAA encourages research to promote improvements in alcohol SBI, including increased utilization and 
a better understanding of outcomes—for example: 
• Collecting additional evidence of the effectiveness of SBI for alcohol misuse among adolescents and 
older adults 
• Assessing the effectiveness of SBI for prevention of alcohol and co-occurring cannabis and  
other drug use, liver disease, atrial fibrillation, and other conditions caused or exacerbated by  
alcohol misuse 
• Continuing to investigate digital technologies for SBI, evaluate their effectiveness, and assess their 
impact on uptake of alcohol SBI in various settings 
• Identifying barriers and effective strategies for increasing real-world adoption (scaling up) of alcohol 
SBI and evidence-based preventive interventions among all populations 
• Measuring the long-term health care cost savings based on the utilization of SBI in the prevention  
or exacerbation of alcohol-related conditions  
Objective 2: Develop and Improve Targeted Interventions to Prevent and Reduce Alcohol 
Misuse Across the Life Course and in Different Settings  
Patterns of alcohol use and misuse vary over the life 
course. Typically, alcohol use is initiated in adolescence, 
peaks in young adulthood, and then gradually declines 
over the course of adulthood. Binge drinking (for a typical 
adult, this corresponds to consuming five or more drinks 
for men and four or more drinks for women in about two 
hours) and high-intensity drinking (defined as alcohol 
intake at levels twice or more the sex-specific threshold 
for binge drinking) often begins or escalates in late 
adolescence or early adulthood.  
The earlier in life a person begins to use and misuse 
alcohol, the greater the likelihood they will go on to 
develop significant problems with alcohol. Furthermore, 
early alcohol use has the potential to negatively impact brain development and increases the likelihood of 
cognitive impairments and AUD. For these reasons, adolescents and young adults remain a central focus 
of prevention research.  


--- PAGE 21 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 19 
Social and environmental factors contribute to decisions about alcohol use throughout life and offer 
opportunities for prevention. As young people progress through adolescence and into adulthood, there is 
considerable variation in life experiences that can increase or decrease the likelihood of alcohol misuse. 
Examples are related to factors such as home and school environment, social experiences (online and in 
person), and opportunities and choices related to education and career.  
Each of these factors provides opportunities for prevention efforts tailored to connect in meaningful ways 
with young people who have varied experiences, beliefs, and access to resources. 
Examples of research in this area that NIAAA encourages include:  
• Creating and tailoring interventions for alcohol misuse for life stage and environment  
• Improving prevention and early intervention through the use of validated biosensors and biomarkers, 
including risk predictions of alcohol-associated disease development and progression using 
biomarker signatures 
• Developing or modifying underage drinking prevention strategies to integrate prevention of combined 
use of other substances 
• Evaluating strategies to prevent and reduce high-intensity drinking  
• Evaluating the impact of social media on alcohol use and associated behaviors as well as the use of 
social media and other digital technologies in the development of “in-the-moment” and other 
innovative prevention interventions 
• Using social media to provide evidence-based information about alcohol 
• Developing prevention models to reduce family and cross-generational effects of alcohol misuse, 
such as violence, child maltreatment, and other harms 
• Designing and evaluating interventions to mitigate the effects of trauma and childhood adversity on 
alcohol misuse and alcohol-related conditions, such as AUD 
• Evaluating the impact of general health promotion strategies (whole person health, including effective 
stress management and coping strategies) on alcohol misuse and AUD 
• Creating interventions to reduce adverse alcohol-related outcomes among different populations 
• Creating interventions for people in specific work environments who are at higher risk for alcohol 
misuse due to work-related stress and trauma, such as first responders and health care providers  

--- PAGE 22 matched=['Goal 4', 'Objective 3', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 20 
Objective 3: Determine the Impacts of Policies on Alcohol Misuse, Health Effects, and 
Acute Harms  
Alcohol-related policies represent a population-level strategy that can affect all individuals within a 
jurisdiction (e.g., federal, state, local, or institutional). A well-known example of an impactful alcohol policy 
is the 1984 U.S. National Minimum Drinking Age Act, which led to the adoption of 21 as the legal age to 
purchase or publicly possess alcohol in all states in 
the United States. The change in drinking age was 
associated with reductions in underage alcohol use 
and related traffic fatalities among young people. 
Policy research has revealed several other effective 
environmental-level interventions that reduce  
alcohol-related harms (see box).  
NIAAA encourages ongoing and new efforts to 
determine the impact of policies on alcohol misuse  
and harms, such as: 
• Examining effects of alcohol policies on alcohol-
related morbidity, mortality, and risk behaviors, 
including but not limited to intentional and 
unintentional injuries, child and maternal health 
outcomes, and chronic conditions 
• Determining the differential effects of alcohol 
policies, including across population subgroups 
• Characterizing the effects of cannabis legalization 
on alcohol misuse, co-use with other substances, 
and related risk behaviors 
• Evaluating the impact of new policies related to alcohol on alcohol-related behaviors or outcomes—
these include additional labeling of alcohol containing products and other policies adopted during the 
COVID-19 pandemic 
• Evaluating the effects of social media marketing on underage drinking and related consequences, 
such as motor vehicle crashes, intentional and unintentional injuries, and other alcohol-related 
consequences (e.g., poor academic and work performance among youth) 
Goal 4: Improve Diagnosis and Expand Treatment of Alcohol Use Disorder and 
Alcohol-Related Conditions 
To advance the treatment of alcohol-related conditions, NIAAA encourages research to refine 
diagnosis, enhance treatment, sustain recovery, and ultimately, to reduce the treatment gap. 
Alcohol-related health conditions are currently 
underdiagnosed and undertreated. Less than 10%  
of people with AUD receive any help despite the 
availability of evidence-based pharmacological  
and behavioral treatments.7 In addition, there are  
no FDA-approved medications for ALD, and evidence-
Environmental-level interventions include: 
• Administrative license suspension 
• 0.08% blood alcohol concentration law, 
with zero tolerance for youth 
• “Use and lose” laws to suspend or revoke 
driver licenses for alcohol violations 
• Restriction of adult provision of alcohol to 
underage individuals 
• Mandatory assessment for drivers with 
alcohol-related traffic citations 
• Dram shop and social host laws 
• Increased alcohol taxes 
• Reduced alcohol outlet density 
• Responsible beverage service laws 
• Laws restricting hours and days of  
alcohol sales 
NIAAA’s Long-Term Vision 
To develop effective treatments that are 
accessible to every person with an 
alcohol-related health problem. 

--- PAGE 23 matched=['Research Themes', 'Goal 4', 'Objective 1'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 21 
based treatment strategies are also needed for other alcohol-associated conditions, such as FASD. 
Developing, optimizing, and implementing evidence-based treatment strategies for AUD and alcohol-
related conditions remain high priorities for NIAAA. Likewise, research to improve the early identification  
and diagnosis of alcohol-related health issues to enhance treatment effectiveness are also important 
NIAAA priorities. 
As described under the Cross-Cutting Theme on Integrating care for alcohol-related problems,  
AUD commonly co-occurs with other health conditions, including organ and tissue damage and mental 
health conditions. Integrating treatment for AUD with treatment of co-occurring conditions related directly 
or indirectly to alcohol use is an important step toward improving alcohol-related outcomes and  
overall health. 
Moreover, improved diagnostic techniques for FASD would enable more accurate diagnosis and earlier 
intervention, offering a better chance for improved outcomes. The Cross-Cutting Research Program on 
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders explores this research area.  
Goal 4 research topics are integrally linked to the Cross-Cutting Research Themes. Examples of NIAAA 
research priorities in this area include the following objectives. 
Objective 1: Enhance Treatment Options for Alcohol Use Disorder and Related Conditions 
Currently, there are three medications for AUD approved by the FDA, and they are effective and 
important treatment aids. Still, given the multiple biological processes that contribute to AUD, new 
medications are needed to provide a broader spectrum of treatment options.  
Pharmacotherapy, especially when combined with behavioral interventions, is an effective, evidence-
based component of AUD treatment. NIAAA encourages research to develop a larger number of 
pharmaceutical treatments for AUD, because people deserve to choose from a range of evidence-based 
treatment options that can be tailored to their individual needs. In addition, improving the precision of 
diagnosis could improve patient outcomes. Because AUD is a complex, highly heterogeneous condition, 
some individuals may, for example, respond best to a medication that helps with craving and relieves 
impulsivity, whereas others may respond best to a medication that reverses the negative emotional state 
of withdrawal or protracted withdrawal symptoms. 
ALD, a spectrum of liver diseases caused by alcohol misuse, is the most common alcohol-related cause of 
death. There are no FDA-approved medications for ALD, and current standard medical treatment, such as 
steroids, may have significant side effects. Through the NIAAA-supported Alcohol-associated Hepatitis 
Network, researchers can use and contribute to ALD research and gain insights into the causes and 
treatments of ALD and integrated treatment of ALD and AUD. Development of drugs that act on multiple 
molecular targets to reverse and prevent progression of liver damage and to reduce alcohol intake  
can open new opportunities. Research may identify similar strategies for other alcohol-associated  
organ damage.  
AUD also frequently co-occurs with sleep, pain, and mental health disorders, such as anxiety disorders. 
Medications to address these co-occurring conditions, in coordination with AUD, could vastly improve 
health outcomes.  
Developing effective pharmacotherapies to addr

--- PAGE 24 matched=['Objective 2', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 22 
• Harnessing computational and data science approaches to identify and evaluate biological, cognitive, 
and behavioral markers, endophenotypes, and clinical characteristics that can be used to predict an 
individual’s response to specific treatments or treatment combinations 
• Developing biomarker and biomarker signatures to serve as surrogate endpoints for intervention 
clinical trials and to improve clinical management of alcohol-associated health conditions  
• Validating alternative outcome measures for alcohol pharmacotherapy trials that will be accepted by 
the FDA for phase II and III trials 
• Developing new or repurposing existing medications to treat AUD, ALD, and other alcohol-associated 
organ dysfunction such as alcohol-associated pancreatitis and acute respiratory distress syndrome 
• Using pharmacoepidemiological approaches to identify potential medication targets to either co-opt 
existing medications for use in alcohol-related conditions or facilitating the development of new 
medications, if necessary 
• Leveraging high-throughput multi-omics, AI, machine learning, and other statistical approaches to 
identify molecular signatures and other potential targets linked to pharmacotherapy for AUD 
• Developing high-throughput screening platforms for discovery of medications to treat AUD  
• Exploring new human laboratory paradigms that will help predict efficacy in clinical trials for AUD/ALD 
medications development 
• Assessing the impact of concurrent use of medications for AUD and other co-occurring disorders on, 
for example, drug interactions and altered drug pharmacokinetics 
• Exploring strategies to design innovative clinical trials to study one or more specific phenotype-
targeted therapies in the context of co-occurring disorders in AUD patients 
Objective 2: Improve and Expand Behavioral Health Strategies for Alcohol Use Disorder 
NIAAA-supported research has generated an extensive evidence base supporting the effectiveness of 
AUD behavioral health strategies that are commonly used today. This evidence has also informed the 
treatment of other substance use disorders. However, at present, little is known about the effectiveness, 
uptake, and implementation of evidence-based behavioral health strategies for AUD. 
Incorporating new scientific discoveries and digital technologies can improve AUD behavioral health 
strategies, contributing to more widespread use in clinical practice and greater acceptability and 
accessibility for all patients. An increased focus on whole person health and treatment approaches 
provides opportunities to enhance health and increase the reach of evidence-based therapies. 
Translating research on the mechanisms and processes through which evidence-based behavioral 
treatments work for individuals can inform the refinement of current therapies to be more effective as well 
as inform the development of new behavioral treatments. 
NIAAA encourages research to improve and expand behavioral health strategies for AUD—for example: 
• Disseminating and implementing evidence-based behavioral health strategies in real-world treatment 
and clinical practice settings 
• Utilizing technologies (e.g., mobile devices, computers, and web-based applications) to enhance the 
dissemination of evidence-based behavioral treatments 

--- PAGE 25 matched=['Objective 3', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 23 
• Exploring how health care professionals’ attention to patients’ religious and spiritual beliefs and 
practices impact treatment and recovery from alcohol-related problems 
• Conducting pragmatic and/or hybrid effectiveness clinical trials that evaluate evidence-based 
behavioral health treatments in various real-world settings 
Objective 3: Advance Research on Recovery From Alcohol Use Disorder 
NIAAA is dedicated to supporting research that explores the complex, individualized nature of recovery 
from AUD. Just as there are varying manifestations of AUD, there is no single path to recovery. Whereas 
some people with AUD recover quickly and with minimal intervention, others need longer or more intense 
treatments and support. Research to identify and characterize the risk, resilience, and other factors  
that contribute to long-term recovery, including factors that allow some people to recover without  
formal treatment, can inform interventions to reduce the risk of a return to drinking and facilitate  
sustained recovery.  
To bring clarity to the concept of recovery and to improve consistency across recovery research,  
NIAAA has developed an operational definition of recovery from AUD. The definition involves remission 
from AUD and cessation from heavy drinking, which are associated with improvements in dimensions of  
well-being, quality of life, and biopsychosocial functioning. NIAAA will continue to support research that 
evaluates the efficacy and effectiveness of treatment strategies that impact long-term recovery, 
particularly using components outlined in NIAAA’s recovery definition. The generation and analysis of 
large treatment and recovery data sets that track long-term recovery, with follow-up timepoints after 
treatment, will be crucial in advancing recovery research. 
Continuing care models and other comprehensive recovery support systems hold promise for sustaining 
longer-term recovery. These systems often include community-based services and supports that aim to 
improve the overall well-being of individuals and build upon critical strengths and resources of individuals, 
families, and communities.  
NIAAA encourages research to enhance knowledge about recovery from AUD and to inform the 
development and implementation of effective strategies to support sustained recovery—for example: 
• Identifying the role of different components of short- and long-term recovery programs  
(e.g., behavioral treatments, medications, inpatient or outpatient treatment, long-term follow-up)  
using NIAAA’s definition of recovery 
• Identifying the potential moderating factors in the trajectories of recovery among sub-populations  
and individuals with co-occurring  
health conditions 
• Defining and assessing dimensions of functioning, quality of life, and well-being that are integral to 
sustained recovery, as well as identifying reliable and valid measures of these constructs that can be 
feasibly adopted in clinical practice 
• Exploring the neurobiological, medical, psychological, behavioral (e.g., self-regulation), environmental, 
social, spiritual, and other quality-of-life mechanisms that influence and enhance recovery 
• Evaluating the efficacy and effectiveness of continuing care models and recovery-oriented systems  
of care in the treatment of and recovery from AUD 

--- PAGE 26 matched=['Objective 4', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 24 
• Leveraging digital health technologies to facilitate recovery and monitor long-term changes  
in outcomes 
• Investigating the role of understudied mutual support groups and of spirituality and religion in 
recovery from AUD 
• Investigating the value of AI approaches to developing algorithms for recovery 
• Exploring how an individual’s engagement in the community (e.g., religious, civic, and occupational 
activities) supports recovery from alcohol and other substances, and how and when health care 
practitioners should support community engagement among individuals in recovery  
Objective 4: Reduce Barriers to Effective Treatment 
Bridging the gap between individuals who need alcohol 
treatment and individuals who seek and receive 
treatment represents a persistent public health 
challenge. Although evidence-based alcohol treatments 
exist, there are barriers to effective treatment. These 
barriers include stigma, reduced access to care, fear of 
punishment or criminalization, lack of health care 
coverage/payment options, employment, lack of child 
care, and lack of awareness of a need for care or of the 
availability of evidence-based care options, along with 
the misconception that treatment does not work. 
Populations such as individuals who are in the criminal 
justice system, are incarcerated, are unhoused, or have 
disabilities, face unique and intersecting barriers to treatment. Furthermore, evidence-based treatments 
are often not disseminated or implemented in real-world settings. 
Health care providers are in a prime position to prevent and address alcohol-related health problems,  
yet many are unfamiliar with the full range of available evidence-based alcohol prevention strategies, 
diagnostic tools, or treatment interventions or may be uncomfortable using them because of stigma or 
lack of training. In addition, as alcohol misuse contributes to and exacerbates other mental and physical 
health issues, addressing alcohol in the context of routine health care provides the opportunity to reach 
more individuals, prevent alcohol-specific and alcohol-related health problems before they develop, and 
identify, diagnose, and address alcohol problems before they become severe.  
NIAAA supports efforts to improve care for alcohol-related health issues in a broad range of settings and 
for use by the full range of professionals involved in treatment. For example, NIAAA developed the 
Healthcare Professional’s Core Resource on Alcohol (HPCR) to provide the basics of what every health 
care professional needs to know about alcohol, including the many ways that alcohol can impact a 
patient’s health, and strategies for prevention and treatment. In the future, NIAAA aims to increase the 
dissemination of the HPCR to medical and other health care professional schools, health plans, and a 
broad range of health care professionals in practice. 
NIAAA encourages research and other activities to increase the integration of evidence-based 
interventions for alcohol-related problems in a broad range of health care settings and that improve 
access to alcohol-related health care services for all—for example: 


--- PAGE 27 matched=['Research \nThemes', 'Goal 1', 'Objective 1'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 25 
• Evaluating strategies at various levels (e.g., individual, societal) to increase education about the need 
for alcohol care and to reduce the stigma of alcohol-associated health problems, with the ultimate 
goal of encouraging appropriate, evidence-based care 
• Enhancing the dissemination, implementation, adoption, adaptation, and sustainment of evidence-
based alcohol screening and treatment strategies and longer-term support in real-world treatment 
settings, including nontraditional settings (e.g., faith-based organizations, shelters for the unstably 
housed and victims of domestic violence, and agencies for child and family services) 
• Identifying and reducing barriers that keep underserved and other populations from seeking and 
receiving appropriate alcohol-related health care, including challenges with access and affordability 
• Understanding the cost and cost-effectiveness of treatment interventions and exploring ways to make 
treatment more affordable 
• Exploring health care models that promote collaboration between primary care and specialty  
care providers to improve implementation of evidence-based approaches and provide ongoing  
follow-up services 
• Exploring and promoting mechanisms to integrate diagnosis and management of AUD with  
co-occurring mental health disorders and other health conditions  
• Expanding affordable and accessible screening, diagnosis, and treatment options in populations, 
especially among people at risk for alcohol misuse and AUD such as individuals in the  
criminal justice system, in the child and family services system, in college, and in certain high  
stress workplaces 
Supporting the Mission 
While funding innovative research is essential to achieving the NIAAA mission, NIAAA recognizes the 
importance of building a robust research capacity and serving as a responsible steward of public 
resources. This section is integral to the success of the Research Goals, Cross-Cutting Research 
Themes, and Cross-Cutting Research Programs sections of this strategic plan. 
Goal 1: Building a Robust Research Capacity  
NIAAA’s ability to pursue its research priorities is supported by the commitment to building and sustaining 
a robust research capacity. At the core of NIAAA’s efforts to build research capacity are cultivating a 
talented scientific and administrative workforce to advance research to the next frontier and maximizing 
NIAAA research resources and infrastructure to promote discovery. 
Objective 1: Enhancing and Sustaining the Alcohol Research Workforce  
The workforce of the alcohol research enterprise is its greatest asset and the key to its success. 
Cultivating and sustaining a robust, highly skilled, scientific and administrative workforce is a major 
NIAAA priority. A thriving workforce enables NIAAA and the alcohol research enterprise to effectively 
adapt to change, tackle complex challenges, and make use of emergent opportunities in a rapidly 
evolving research landscape.  
Sustained scientific progress requires investment in the next generation of researchers. NIAAA will 
continue to prioritize research training and career development programs that foster a talented 

--- PAGE 28 matched=['Objective 2', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 26 
biomedical workforce for today and for the future. To strengthen its training programs, NIAAA will  
focus on: 
• Expanding outreach about NIAAA and NIH research training programs and opportunities to 
communities and early-stage investigators 
• Collaborating with NIH partners on training funding opportunities that advance the alcohol  
research workforce 
• Developing and implementing best practices for NIAAA’s research training programs 
• Identifying strategies to assess training outcomes  
NIAAA’s intramural research training program will also continue to provide robust training opportunities to 
emerging scientists from all backgrounds.  
Internally, NIAAA will continue to maintain a strong leadership team, enhance efforts to effectively 
leverage the strengths of NIAAA staff, provide training and career development opportunities to develop 
their skills and talents, and cultivate a positive and collaborative environment.  
Objective 2: Supporting Research Resources and Infrastructure 
The scientific workforce’s ability to advance biomedical and behavioral research depends on access to 
state-of-the-art resources and infrastructure that maximize their research potential.  
NIAAA supports Alcohol Research Centers across the United States that serve as regional or national 
research resources and as incubators for collaborative studies that contribute to the development of new 
research methods, technologies, and approaches that sustain innovative goal-directed research. These 
centers have historically served as seeds for the development of researchers in the alcohol research field 
in different geographical regions that have limited ongoing alcohol research. NIAAA also supports 
research consortia, which conduct collaborative, interdisciplinary research among widely distributed 
research institutions. NIAAA-supported research centers and consortia serve as models for optimizing 
research resources and infrastructure, and as resources for data, biospecimens, tools, expertise, and 
training in the alcohol research field more broadly. NIAAA’s Alcohol Research Resource (R24 and R28) 
Awards program supports investigator-initiated projects that develop research resources for the broader 
alcohol research community and represent NIAAA efforts to accelerate alcohol-related research in a  
cost-effective manner. 
NIAAA’s Intramural Research Program (IRP) provides a unique environment for stimulating cutting-edge, 
innovative basic, translational, and clinical research on AUD and other alcohol-related problems.  
This includes a clinical research facility on the NIH main campus that hosts an outpatient clinic and an 
inpatient unit for treatment and research. The NIAAA IRP’s ability to generate groundbreaking 
technologies and advances to be shared for use by the alcohol research field is a particular strength of 
the program.  
To promote data sharing and accelerate the pace of discovery, NIAAA established the NIAAA Data 
Archive, which houses and shares de-identified data from human participants in NIAAA-funded research. 
The NIAAA Data Archive is maintained within the larger NIMH Data Archive, which comprises a 
harmonization and sharing infrastructure that facilitates transparency, rigor, and reproducibility of 
scientific research.  

--- PAGE 29 matched=['Goal 2', 'Objective 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 27 
Goal 2: Serving as a Responsible Steward of the Public’s Investment  
As a federal agency, NIAAA works continually to uphold the values of responsible stewardship, research 
integrity, and public trust. These values are reinforced by NIAAA’s commitment to optimal management 
and accountability, strategic collaboration, and communication of research results.  
Objective 1: Ensuring Optimal Management and Accountability 
NIAAA strives to continually optimize operations across its administrative and scientific functions through 
sound, data-driven business practices. NIAAA also engages in risk management to proactively identify 
and mitigate risks to the institute’s research objectives, including risks to patient safety. For example, 
NIAAA recently developed a serious adverse event (SAE) reporting tool to capture SAEs that occur in 
NIAAA-funded clinical trials. This tool will allow NIAAA to m itigate future risks in studies with similar 
parameters, interventions, or study populations.  
NIAAA develops research programs and initiatives based on scientific needs and opportunities as well as 
budget considerations. Concepts for initiatives are presented publicly to the National Advisory Council on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism for feedback on the merit of the initiative as well as clearance to move 
forward. Proceedings of National Advisory Council meetings and concept descriptions are available to the 
public online. This process not only enhances transparency in NIAAA’s operations but also provides the 
research community and NIAAA’s constituents additional insight into the institute’s research directions 
and priorities. Such transparency encourages participation of NIAAA’s constituents in shaping the 
directions and goals of NIAAA’s mission. 
NIAAA demonstrates effective stewardship by funding research proposals that are deemed highly 
meritorious through scientific peer review. NIAAA uses a rigorous, two-level scientific peer review 
process that emphasizes fairness and accountability in funding decisions and prioritizes scientific ideas 
with the greatest potential to advance the NIAAA mission. The outcomes of peer review inform NIAAA’s 
funding decisions, which also consider portfolio balance, scientific opportunity, public health needs, 
budget, and other priorities. To promote optimal stewardship in this domain, NIAAA will continue to 
identify and recruit a pool of scientific peer reviewers based on career stage and geographic region,. 
NIAAA will also continually assess and improve its funding procedures to ensure efficient, seamless 
awards management. 
In support of NIH’s focus on improving rigor and reproducibility of research, NIAAA emphasizes the 
importance of robust and unbiased experimental design, methodology, analysis, interpretation,  
and reporting of results in NIAAA-supported research. This includes standardization of animal models 
across NIAAA’s Alcohol Research Centers and Consortia, transparency in reporting experimental details 
so that others can reproduce and extend the findings, and adequate inclusion of females into 
appropriately powered research designs for both animal and human studies. NIAAA will be focusing on 
ke
y challenges in data management and sharing, such as developing common data elements for 
preclinical and clinical research, participating with data repositories and knowledge bases, and facil

--- PAGE 30 matched=['Objective 2', 'Strategic Plan', 'research areas'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 28 
Objective 2: Collaborating Across the National Institutes of Health and Beyond to Address 
Common Challenges 
Alcohol misuse affects virtually every tissue and organ in the body and is associated with more than  
200 diseases and injury-related conditions. For this reason, coordination of efforts related to shared 
research interests across NIH and other federal agencies is a key strategy for efficiently responding to 
complex alcohol-related problems and maximizing research resources. NIAAA coordinates on various 
research areas, including the following examples. 
Adverse effects of alcohol on health. NIAAA collaborates with NIH institutes, centers, and offices  
on a wide range of topics, such as cancer, liver cirrhosis, Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias,  
sex differences and women’s health research, maternal health, health disparities research, wearable 
biosensors, and data sharing and management. In the IRP, NIAAA jointly supports the Center on 
Compulsive Behaviors and will jointly launch the National Taste and Smell Center. 
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. NIAAA sponsors and chairs the Interagency Coordinating Committee 
on Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders, which coordinates communication and collaboration on issues 
related to prenatal alcohol exposure across NIH ICs (i.e., Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development, National Institute on Drug Abuse [NIDA]), and NIMH and  
HHS agencies. 
Prevention and treatment of substance misuse. NIAAA partners with NIDA and the National Cancer 
Institute through the Collaborative Research on Addiction at NIH (CRAN), which integrates resources and 
expertise to advance research on substance use and related consequences. A major CRAN-led initiative 
is the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development® Study, the largest long-term study of brain development 
and child health in the United States. NIAAA also participates in advancing the HEALthy Brain and Child 
Development Study, which aims to better understand brain development during childhood. NIAAA also 
participates in the Interagency Coordinating Committee on the Prevention of Underage Drinking, led by 
the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, which coordinates federal activities 
related to the prevention of underage drinking. 
Neuroscience research. NIAAA participates in the NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research,  
a collaborative framework that confronts neuroscience challenges that are too large for any single  
NIH institute, center, or office. As part of the Brain Research Through Advancing Innovative 
Neurotechnologies® Initiative, NIAAA provides support with other NIH ICs to develop cutting-edge tools 
that will contribute to an enhanced understanding of brain disorders. 
Pain research. Understanding the relationship between alcohol and pain is an important area of 
research that may have implications for numerous health conditions. NIAAA participates in the Helping to 
End Addiction Long-term® Initiative, an NIH-wide effort to speed scientific research to address the opioid 
crisis by better addressing pain, opioid misuse, AUD, and other substance use disorders. NIAAA also 
participates in the NIH Pain Consortium.  
External partnerships. In addition to research collaborations, NIAAA leverages partnerships with 
professional, patient, advocacy, and community organiza

--- PAGE 31 matched=['Objective 3', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 29 
Objective 3: Communicating Research Results and Evidence-Based Information to 
the Public 
To promote responsible stewardship, NIAAA communicates research findings to the public and translates 
scientific findings into resources that the public can use. These efforts are vital to the NIAAA mission 
because they raise awareness of alcohol’s adverse effects on health and empower individuals, 
professionals, and communities with evidence-based resources to address alcohol-related challenges. 
Together, these steps can help to reduce the stigma that often prevents people impacted by alcohol 
misuse from seeking help and support. Importantly, the communication of research results demonstrates 
progress in advancing research.  
The goals of NIAAA’s communications and outreach programs are to develop and evaluate content and 
activities that disseminate unbiased science information and position NIAAA as an authoritative source of 
credible health messaging. This work encompasses news media, social media, strategic partnerships, 
and the creation of educational and information resources for varied audiences. These resources include 
websites such as the Alcohol Treatment Navigator, which helps individuals identify and find quality AUD 
treatment for themselves or a loved one, and Rethinking Drinking, which assists people in evaluating their 
relationship with alcohol. NIAAA also developed the HPCR to assist health care professionals with 
preventing, identifying, and treating alcohol-related problems, as well as various school-based resources 
to facilitate the prevention of underage drinking.  
NIAAA also prioritizes communicating research results and providing data to stimulate new research. 
Examples include Alcohol Research: Current Reviews, an open-access, peer-reviewed scientific journal, 
and the Alcohol Policy Information System, a database of alcohol-related policies at the state and federal 
levels and policies on the recreational use of cannabis.  
Going forward, NIAAA will continue to create and promote educational materials for addressing alcohol 
misuse and AUD in various settings. NIAAA will also pursue innovative ways to connect with the public  
so that they have access to research findings to make informed choices about alcohol use. NIAAA will 
continue to translate its products into multiple languages to increase access to evidence-based 
information and to engage in strategic partnerships that extend the reach of NIAAA-supported research 
findings and information resources. 
 
1 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Alcohol and Public Health: Alcohol-Related Disease Impact. [Table], 
Annual average for United States 2020–2021 alcohol-attributable deaths due to excessive alcohol use, all ages. [cited 2024  
Mar 15]. Available from: https://nccd.cdc.gov/DPH_ARDI/Default/Report.aspx?T=AAM&P=F1F85724-AEC5-4421-BC88-
3E8899866842&R=EACE3036-77C9-4893-9F93-17A5E1FEBE01&M=7F40785C-D481-440A-970F-50EFBD21B35B&F=&D= 
2 National Center for Health Statistics Mortality Data on CDC WONDER. Current final multiple cause of death data, 2018–2021. 
[Internet]. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2023 Sept [cited 2023 Feb 9]. Available from: 
https://wonder.cdc.gov/mcd.html 
3 National Center for Statistics and Analysis, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Overview of motor vehicle crashes 
in 2021 [Internet]. 

--- PAGE 32 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2024–2028 30 
 
5 Islami F, Sauer AG, Miller KD, Siegel RL, Fedewa SA, Jacobs EJ, McCullough ML, Patel AV, Ma J, Soerjomataram I, Flanders 
WD, Brawley OW, Gapstur SM, Jemal A. Proportion and number of cancer cases and deaths attributable to potentially 
modifiable risk factors in the United States. CA Cancer J Clin. 2018 Jan;68(1):31-54. doi:10.3322/caac.21440. Epub 2017 Nov 
21. PubMed PMID: 29160902 
6 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. 
2022 National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Table 5.9A—Alcohol use disorder in past year: among people aged 12 or older; 
by age group and demographic characteristics, numbers in thousands, 2021 and 2022. [cited 2023 Dec 8]. Available 
from: https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/reports/rpt42728/NSDUHDetailedTabs2022/NSDUHDetailedTabs2022/NS
DUHDetTabsSect5pe2022.htm#tab5.9a  
7 SAMHSA, Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. 2022 National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Table 5.32B—
Received substance use treatment in past year: among people aged 12 or older; by age group and past year drug use disorder, 
past year alcohol use disorder, past year drug and alcohol use disorder, and past year substance use disorder, percentages, 
2021 and 2022. [cited 2023 Dec 13]. Available from: 
https://samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/reports/rpt42728/NSDUHDetailedTabs2022/NSDUHDetailedTabs2022/NSDUHDetTa
bsSect5pe2022.htm?s=5.32&#tab5.32b 
8 White AM, Slater ME, Ng G, Hingson R, Breslow R. Trends in alcohol-related emergency department visits in the United 
States: results from the Nationwide Emergency Department Sample, 2006 to 2014. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2018 Feb;42(2):352-
9. doi: 10.1111/acer.13559. Epub 2018 Jan 2. PubMed PMID: 29293274 
9 Case A, Deaton A. Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among white non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st century. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Dec 8;112(49):15078-83. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1518393112. Epub 2015 Nov 2. PubMed PMID: 26575631 
 
 
