# NICHD (2025) — file: NICHD_Strategic_Plan_2025.pdf
# 51 pages matched priority-heading patterns


--- PAGE 1 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
NICHD  
Strategic Plan  
2025
Healthy pregnancies. 
Healthy children. 
Healthy and optimal lives.


--- PAGE 2 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Fluorescence microscopy image of 
chromosomes in pre-sperm cells 
from the silkworm, Bombyx mori. 
Three of the 28 chromosomes 
are labeled using the Oligopaint 
method, shown in pink, green, and 
blue. Total DNA is shown in gray. 
Credit: Rosin Lab, NICHD
Front cover, bottom right image: 
Cortical interneurons are 
individually labeled with a unique 
hue in transgenic Brainbow mice. 
Credit: Petros Lab, NICHD
2 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 3 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN', 'Table of Contents', 'Vision'] ---
Table of Contents
Mission ........................................................................................................4
Vision ...................................................................................................................4
Director’s Message .........................................................................................5
Introduction .........................................................................................................6
Scientific Research .............................................................................................8
Understanding the Molecular, Cellular, and Structural 
Basis of Development .................................................................................................................16
Advancing Gynecologic, Andrologic, and Reproductive Health ....................20
Setting the Foundation for Healthy Pregnancies 
and Lifelong Wellness
 ..................................................................................................24
Improving Child and Adolescent Health and the Transition 
to Adulthood .......................................................................................................................28
Fostering Safe and Effective Therapeutics and Devices 
for Pregnant Women, Lactating Women, Children, and 
People with Disabilities .....................................................................................32
Aspirational Goals
 ......................................................................................36
Research Capacity and Scientific Stewardship ................................................38
Operational Priorities, Management, and Accountability ..............................42
Appendix 1: NICHD Statutory Authority ...........................................................................44
Appendix 2: NICHD Organization and Functions .....................................................46
Appendix 3: Strategic Planning Process .........................................................48
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 3

--- PAGE 4 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN', 'Vision', 'Mission'] ---
Mission
NICHD leads research and 
training to understand human 
development, improve 
reproductive health, enhance the 
lives of children and adolescents, 
and optimize abilities for all.
Vision
Healthy pregnancies. 
Healthy children. 
Healthy and optimal lives.
4 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 5 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
Director’s Message
For more than 60 years, the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) 
has led research to improve the health of women, children, 
and people with disabilities. In the fields of developmental 
biology, gynecologic and reproductive health, child health 
and development, population dynamics, and medical 
rehabilitation, our longstanding commitment to research 
and training has facilitated new discoveries about health and 
disease and inspired investigators to confront the medical issues 
that affect people of all ages.
Today, the United States and the international community face an array of challenges that 
threaten to erode gains in public health. At the same time, technology breakthroughs, whether 
in genome sequencing or artificial intelligence, show promise for advancing medical care while 
raising new ethical issues. NICHD must remain well positioned to support the research and 
training needed to address these evolving challenges and opportunities.
Our 2025 Strategic Plan offers a fresh look at the institute’s research objectives, goals, and 
aspirations. NICHD staff and external scientists and public representatives worked closely 
together to identify emerging scientific areas in which the institute can invest and lead, as 
well as partner with other institutes, centers, and agencies. We also learned from advocacy 
groups and people with lived experiences, who thoughtfully shared their stories and ideas 
with us. The remarkable amount of feedback we received during this process reflects the 
significance of our research to the public’s health and well-being.
We are truly grateful to everyone who helped us bring this NICHD 2025 Strategic Plan to 
fruition. The process has provided us with the welcome opportunity to step back and evaluate 
progress on our 2020 Strategic Plan and consider the best way forward. Although we cannot 
anticipate all the challenges the future will bring, we believe that this plan provides a solid 
foundation for advancing health and quality of life for all Americans through research and 
research training.
Sincer
ely,
/S/
Diana W. Bianchi, M.D. 
Dir
ector 
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development 
National Institutes of Health
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 5

--- PAGE 6 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN', 'Division of \n'] ---
Introduction
Since its founding in 1962 (via 42 
U.S.C. §285g), NICHD has advanced 
the health of our nation, conducting 
and supporting research, training, 
and health information dissemination 
with respect to gynecologic health, 
maternal health, child health, 
intellectual disabilities, human growth 
and development, population research, 
and special health requir
ements of 
mothers and children (for more details 
on NICHD’s statutory authority, visit 
Appendix 1
). 
NICHD is one of the 
27 institutes and centers within the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH). 
NICHD’s organization includes the 
Office of the Director, the Division of 
Extramural Research, the Division 
of Intramural Research, and the 
Division of Extramural Activities. The 
institute is also home to the National 
Center for Medical Rehabilitation 
Research, which supports scientific 
programs and coordinates research 
efforts across NIH and the federal 
government to enhance the health and 
quality of life of people with physical 
disabilities (for more information on 
NICHD’s organization and functions, 
visit Appendix 2).
6 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 7 matched=['scientific priorit', 'Strategic Plan', 'vision'] ---
NICHD recognizes the need to regularly 
refine the institute’s priorities to provide 
effective leadership of the nation’s 
investment in its research. For this 
plan, NICHD updated institute priorities 
to build upon the progress from the 
NICHD Strategic Plan 2020 and 
capitalize on technological and scientific 
advances from the last five years.
The NICHD Strategic Plan 2025 will 
guide the institute’s activities over 
the next five years, establishing 
goals to drive scientific research and 
build research capacity, enhance 
scientific stewardship, and support 
effective management practices and 
accountability. NICHD adhered to three 
core principles to define goals and 
priorities for this strategy: transparency, 
evidence-informed decisions, and 
participation of both internal and 
external experts. The strategic plan is 
the result of an institute-wide process 
that included close consultation with 
the external scientific community to 
identify priorities that reflect the current 
and emerging scientific landscape. 
The strategic planning process also 
included identifying measurable 
objectives and activities that map 
to refreshed scientific priorities (for 
additional information on the strategic 
planning process, visit Appendix 3).
The goals outlined in this plan drive 
progress toward NICHD’s vision of 
healthy pregnancies, healthy children, 
and healthy and optimal lives. NICHD 
recognizes that its ambitious mission 
cannot be achieved alone. The goals 
in this plan will require collaboration 
across NICHD and with other NIH 
institutes and centers, federal partners, 
public and private entities, and the 
communities we serve.
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 7

--- PAGE 8 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Scientific Research
This confocal photo of human 
neurons was named an Image 
of Distinction in the 2024 Nikon 
Small World Photomicrography 
Competition. Credit: Saikat Ghosh, 
Ph.D., Bonifacino Lab, NICHD 
NICHD’s work 
encompasses the 
full range of scientific 
research, from the 
most fundamental 
studies at the 
molecular and cellular 
levels to the behavioral 
and clinical sciences. 
8 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 9 matched=['scientific priorit', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
The institute’s strategic research priorities are presented under five broad goals: 
NICHD 
Research Goals
1. Understanding the 
Molecular, Cellular, 
and Structural Basis 
of Development
2. Advancing 
Gynecologic, 
Andrologic, and 
Reproductive 
Health
3. Setting the Foundation for Healthy 
Pregnancies and Lifelong Wellness
4.  Improving Child and 
Adolescent Health 
and the Transition to 
Adulthood
5. Fostering Safe and Effective 
Therapeutics and Devices for 
Pregnant Women, Lactating 
Women, Children, and People 
with Disabilities
The five overall research goals from 
NICHD’s Strategic Plan 2020 have 
not changed. However, the research 
opportunities and scientific priorities 
within each goal reflect advancements 
in the scientific landscape and the 
resulting new opportunities for 
innovative scientific discovery. These 
goals will enable NICHD to focus efforts 
on critical public health challenges and 
advance scientific knowledge in these 
priority areas. Across these five broad 
goals, NICHD has identified specific 
research opportunities and scientific 
priorities that represent new avenues 
to accelerate scientific progress. The 
institute will track its activities related 
to these goals and priorities; analyze 
the scientific, clinical, and public 
health impact of its research; monitor 
the effect of research capacity-
building efforts; and periodically report 
on research initiatives and scientific 
progress to the public through the 
NICHD website, meetings and events, 
and through presentations to NICHD’s 
advisory groups.  
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 9

--- PAGE 10 matched=['scientific priorit', 'Cross-Cutting Theme', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
Cross-Cutting Themes
As established in the NICHD 
Strategic Plan 2020, several cross-
cutting themes emerged from 
discussions on NICHD’s public 
health and scientific priorities. These 
cross-cutting concepts are tightly 
interwoven with the scientific research 
goals. Substantial progress on the 
institute’s scientific research goals and 
objectives will depend on NICHD’s 
ability to integrate and advance 
research on these topics within the 
scientific research goals.
Health Disparities and 
Health Equity
NICHD’s research aims to optimize 
health for all people. The institute 
recognizes that overall health is 
influenced by a wide range of 
biological, social, and environmental 
factors, including safe and healthy 
environments, poverty, geographic 
location, and access to health care, 
among many others. Understanding 
the full range of social, economic, 
and structural factors that contribute 
to differences in health outcomes 
across various communities will inform 
research to develop innovative solutions 
to wide-ranging health problems.
To achieve health equity, NICHD is 
particularly interested in advancing 
evidence-based prevention, 
diagnostic, and intervention research 
that will improve maternal, infant, 
child, and adolescent health and 
birth outcomes; address social 
determinants of health; mitigate 
exposure to trauma and injury; 
facilitate medical rehabilitation 
outcomes; and promote healthy 
development throughout the lifespan.
Health Disparity Populations
NIH defines a health disparity as a health difference 
that adversely affects disadvantaged populations. 
NIH health disparity populations include:
» Underserved rural communities
» Racial and ethnic minority groups
» People with lower socioeconomic status
» Sexual minority groups
» People with disabilities
10 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 11 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN', 'mission'] ---
Prevention
Prevention and health promotion 
are central to NICHD’s mission. 
Establishing healthy behaviors and 
minimizing exposure to risk in early 
life sets a course for optimal lifelong 
health and development. Scientific 
understanding of the early origins of 
later disorders can help identify the 
best ways to approach prevention. To 
develop this knowledge, researchers 
need access to detailed, high-
quality data on a range of conditions 
and exposures that occur from 
preconception through adulthood. 
Moreover, scientists will require better 
measurement and analytic tools to 
fully describe childhood risk factors 
and how they relate to short- and 
long-term health outcomes. These 
outcomes should not be limited 
to absence of disease, but also 
encompass measures of positive 
health and well-being.
New prevention approaches must 
be accessible and applicable to 
all people, including individuals 
with disabilities, pregnant women, 
lactating women, and children. 
People who may face greater health 
care challenges, such as those with 
chronic conditions and those who live 
in rural communities, need accessible 
and affordable interventions that can 
be provided outside of traditional 
high-cost clinical settings.
Infectious Disease
Infectious diseases, such as HIV, 
continue to pose a significant 
threat to maternal health and child 
development. At the same time, 
pathogens with previously unknown 
disease-causing properties constantly 
evolve and emerge. NICHD plans to 
improve the understanding of how 
infectious pathogens affect pregnant 
women and pediatric populations, 
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 11

--- PAGE 12 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
12 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 13 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
address the impact of infections 
on reproductive and overall health 
in children and adolescents, and 
advance safe and effective treatments 
for pregnant women, lactating 
women, children, adolescents, and 
people with disabilities.
Nutrition
Nutrition is critical to childhood 
growth and development and plays 
a central role in maintaining optimal 
health throughout the lifespan. New 
technologies and methods allow 
scientists to characterize the complex 
biology of nutrition and the potential 
beneficial effects of diet on disease 
prevention.  – Omics technologies, 
including metabolomics, and 
discoveries related to the effects of 
diet on the microbiome have emerged 
as important areas of research. These 
new avenues for scientific discovery 
will elucidate the lifetime impact of 
nutrition on fertility, pregnancy, and 
childhood growth. 
NICHD supports the investigation of 
human milk as the optimal source 
of nutrition and mode of nutrient 
delivery to the infant, especially 
preterm infants. NICHD seeks to 
further understand the effects of 
maternal nutrition and length of 
gestation on human milk composition 
and envisions that this area of 
investigation will lead to precise age-
appropriate standard requirements for 
infant feeding.
Global Health
A scientific discovery anywhere in the 
world will benefit individuals around 
the globe. The rates of maternal and 
child survival and long-term health 
outcomes have improved globally 
because of research supported by 
NICHD and other agencies. Recent 
advances in the treatment of infectious 
diseases have enabled a shift to 
research aimed at prevention and early 
intervention for chronic conditions 
among at-risk children and adults. New 
interventions to improve reproductive 
health will help benefit pregnancy 
outcomes and prevent prematurity, 
malnutrition, childhood stunting, 
disease, developmental delays, and 
disability. Studying populations globally 
will improve domestic capabilities 
to address disease and risk factors 
among the culturally diverse U.S. 
population. Finally, new technologies 
are emerging to improve assessment 
and intervention for people with 
intellectual, developmental, and 
physical disabilities worldwide, 
and NICHD will support research in 
this area.
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 13

--- PAGE 14 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Advanced Technologies and 
Artificial Intelligence
New technologies such as 
artificial intelligence (AI), advanced 
bioinformatics, and related tools have 
presented opportunities for scientists 
in a wide variety of biomedical fields. 
For example, researchers can use AI 
to analyze patterns in their data and 
identify therapeutic targets, speeding 
up the drug discovery process. AI can 
also help improve the functionality 
of prosthetic devices and address 
diagnostic challenges for a wide range 
of conditions. For example, using AI 
and advanced techniques to analyze 
the path of arm movements, NICHD 
researchers were able to distinguish 
a high proportion of children with 
autism spectrum disorder from 
typically developing children and from 
neurotypical adults. Using AI and 
related methods, another group of 
researchers was able to double the 
rate of accurate genetic diagnosis 
compared to previous methods, and 
to do so more rapidly and at lower 
cost. NICHD is particularly interested 
in capitalizing on the full potential of 
these new tools and technologies to 
improve understanding of complex 
developmental mechanisms; advance 
maternal, infant, child, and adolescent 
health and birth outcomes; improve 
medical rehabilitation outcomes; 
and accelerate the time to market 
for new therapeutics.
Research Training and Career 
Development
Obtaining the skills and knowledge 
to conduct biomedical research 
takes years of effort. Moreover, 
because science is complex and 
unpredictable, young scientists 
need the time and tools to explore 
complicated research questions 
in depth. NICHD’s commitment to 
researchers encompasses training and 
career development at all stages of a 
scientific career. The institute provides 
funding for many graduate students 
and postdoctoral fellows across the 
United States who represent the next 
generation of the scientific workforce. 
NICHD aims to launch the careers 
of highly talented people who are 
motivated by scientific discovery and 
driven to help others. Moreover, as 
part of this strategic planning process, 
NICHD identified areas of biomedical 
research in which workforce training 
must adapt to meet growing needs. 
These imperatives include maximizing 
the benefits of physician-scientist 
training, expanding the data science 
workforce, and promoting cross-
training of basic scientists, behavioral 
and social scientists, and clinical 
researchers to maximize opportunities 
for health advances.
14 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 15 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 15

--- PAGE 16 matched=['Goal\n1', 'STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Goal
1
Understanding the 
Molecular, Cellular, 
and Structural Basis 
of Development
Fluorescence microscopy image of neurons 
with defective lysosome transport and 
fusion. Mitochondria are in purple, and 
autophagosomes (vesicles in which cellular 
components are degraded) are in green. Credit: 
Raffaella de Pace, Ph.D., Saikat Ghosh, Ph.D., 
Bonifacino Lab, NICHD
Goal Statement
Enhance knowledge of 
transcriptional and translational 
networks at a variety of levels, 
enabling scientists to more 
fully describe the intrinsic 
processes and the role of 
extrinsic factors in typical and 
atypical human development.
16 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 17 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Research Opportunities
Investment in understanding typical 
developmental processes provides the 
foundation to characterize underlying 
mechanisms of congenital conditions, 
such as structural birth anomalies, 
neurodevelopmental disorders, 
and intellectual and developmental 
disabilities. The complex processes 
underlying early human development 
have long been difficult to understand. 
Although scientists have known that 
regulatory molecular networks control 
development and differentiation of 
cells, observing these networks in 
action has been especially challenging. 
Now these processes can be 
scrutinized with new technologies. 
Powered by computational biology, 
AI, and advanced imaging techniques, 
researchers are better able to follow 
early development at the single-cell 
and tissue levels. Further advances 
in methods for temporal and/or 
spatial transcriptome analysis can 
help scientists map the intrinsic 
procedures that underlie development 
across the lifespan. This expansion of 
fundamental knowledge may also allow 
researchers to harness developmental 
pathways and growth factors to create 
regenerative interventions.
Advances in the basic sciences of 
developmental biology can pave 
the way for scientists to identify 
environmental, nutritional, and other 
extrinsic factors that may raise the risk 
of congenital anomalies, intellectual 
and developmental disabilities, and 
other conditions that may not arise until 
long after birth. As researchers are 
better able to characterize genetic 
and cellular variants in a wide variety 
of model systems and in humans, 
opportunities will emerge to recognize 
how extrinsic risk factors contribute  
to neurodevelopmental disorders.  
As this knowledge base grows, 
scientists will be able to identify 
prevention opportunities. These 
opportunities will grow in greater 
abundance, and their promise will 
arrive more quickly, with investment 
in infrastructure and the use of 
advanced analytical techniques, such 
as AI. With support from NICHD, 
scientists will rapidly and accurately 
discern the appropriate model 
systems and data analysis methods 
to address the most challenging 
research questions.
Transparent 
zebrafish embryos 
are injected with 
messenger RNA that 
introduces light-
sensitive proteins 
to the organism. 
Credit: Allison Saul, 
Rogers Lab, NICHD
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 17


--- PAGE 18 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
 
Scientific Objectives and Priorities
» Use advanced analytical techniques, including AI, to 
characterize transcriptional and translational networks 
and profile gene, RNA, and protein expression across 
tissues and time during development.
 » Enhance collaborative and interdisciplinary 
developmental biology research by 
investing in improved infrastructure, tools, 
and technologies.
 » Improve understanding of the mechanisms 
underlying developmental processes by 
elucidating the intrinsic factors (such as 
cellular, molecular, genetic, epigenetic, 
metabolic, and biomechanical factors) that 
contribute to pre- and postnatal development.
 » Explore how extrinsic factors (such as prenatal 
and perinatal insults, metabolic and nutritional 
deficiencies, environmental factors, infection, and 
early injury) influence developmental and physiological 
processes, particularly in the context of addressing 
congenital anomalies, neurodevelopmental disorders, 
and intellectual and developmental disabilities. 
Testicular macrophages are 
recruited during a narrow fetal 
time window and promote 
organ-specific developmental 
functions. Credit: X. Gu, et al.  
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-
023-37199-0. Funding: 
R01HD094698
18 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 19 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
The photo featured in this postage stamp was 
taken by Daniel Castranova, with assistance 
from former trainee Bakary Samasa, while 
working in the Weinstein Lab at NICHD. USPS
® 
made the image part of its Life Magnified 
stamp panel in 2023. The image also received 
the top honor in the 46th annual Nikon Small 
World Photomicrography Competition in 2020. 
Stamp Credit: USPS
®
Unveiling of the Life Magnified 
stamp panel at the USPS, 
August 10, 2023. Scott English, 
American Philatelic Society (left); 
Luke Grossman, USPS (right). 
Credit: USPS
®
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 19

--- PAGE 20 matched=['Goal\n2', 'STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Goal
2
 
Advancing Gynecologic, 
Andrologic, and 
Reproductive Health  
Goal Statement
Enable women and men 
to minimize the impact 
of gynecologic and 
andrologic conditions 
and support lifelong 
reproductive health.
20 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 21 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN', 'area of focus'] ---
Research Opportunities
Gynecologic and andrologic conditions 
have a major impact on quality of life 
for millions of Americans. Many girls 
and women experience conditions 
such as endometriosis, uterine fibroids, 
pelvic pain, polycystic ovary syndrome 
(PCOS), and pelvic organ dysfunction. 
Men and boys may experience 
undescended testes, cryptorchidism, 
hypogonadism, varicocele, and other 
andrologic conditions. Male and female 
reproductive health disorders can be 
complex clinically and present scientific 
challenges for researchers. However, 
recent advances have created 
opportunities to better understand 
reproductive health across the lifespan 
and to develop interventions that 
prevent and treat gynecologic and 
andrologic conditions.
Understanding the basic biology of 
healthy reproductive development, 
especially the role of menstruation 
and endometrial biology, could lead 
to new avenues for preventing and 
treating a wide range of conditions. 
NICHD is prioritizing research that 
expands fundamental knowledge of 
reproductive health across the life cycle 
and characterizes the role of reproductive 
aging. For example, characterizing critical 
windows such as puberty, andropause, 
and perimenopause and assessing how 
the timing of puberty affects reproductive 
development could lead to less-invasive 
options to treat infertility.
Expanding the options that allow people 
to manage their fertility will continue 
to be an area of focus for NICHD. 
Attention to social determinants of health 
in research studies could also help 
scientists uncover the reasons behind 
the gynecologic health disparities and 
lead to better outcomes for individuals 
with endometriosis, fibroids, pelvic floor 
disorders, and PCOS. Informed by 
studies of generalized pain conditions, 
research on gynecologic pain aims to 
prevent the transition from acute to 
chronic pain, improving the quality of life 
for millions of American women.
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 21

--- PAGE 22 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
 
Scientific Objectives and Priorities
» Improve understanding of 
reproductive stages across 
the life cycle, with particular 
emphasis on typical and 
atypical initiation, timing, 
and symptomatology of 
critical windows such 
as puberty, andropause, 
and perimenopause.
 » Characterize reproductive 
aging and its impact on 
reproductive, andrologic, and 
gynecologic outcomes, particularly 
infertility and the health of children 
born to older parents.
 » Identify biologic and environmental 
factors that can lead or contribute 
to infertility in males and females. 
Apply this knowledge to expand 
technologies or methods for 
fertility stimulation, fertility 
preservation, and contraception.
 » Identify risk factors and biologic 
and psychosocial mechanisms 
underlying pelvic and generalized 
pain in gynecologic conditions, 
such as endometriosis, fibroids, 
vulvodynia, dysmenorrhea, 
and pelvic floor disorders, and 
prevent transition from acute 
to chronic pain.
 » Identify interventions for 
diagnosis and treatment of 
gynecologic conditions, including 
endometriosis, fibroids, pelvic 
floor disorders, gynecologic pain, 
and PCOS. Assess the impact 
of new and existing treatment 
approaches on gynecologic 
health disparities.
 » Improve understanding of the 
multilevel factors affecting 
contraceptive use and non-use 
and preferences for specific 
methods. Apply this knowledge 
to developing new and improved 
contraceptive options for 
both men and women and to 
designing interventions that 
improve access to and use of 
preferred methods. 
 » Advance knowledge about the 
effects of contraceptives on 
human health, including their 
effectiveness as treatments for 
health conditions.
Cross-sections of 
rabbit uteri are used to 
evaluate progestogenic 
activity of a potential 
contraceptive agent. 
Credit: M.S. Lee, 
et al. 
DOI: 10.1093/
biolre/ioad111. 
Credit: Contraceptive 
Development 
Program, NICHD 
22 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 23 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
In situ hybridization of miR-21 
expression and 18SrRNA expression 
in the mouse uterus and in mouse 
endometriotic lesions at three months 
post-induction of endometriosis. 
Hybridization intensity is displayed 
in yellow. Credit: M.A. Ochoa Bernal, 
et al. 
DOI: 10.3390/ijms25168994. 
Funding: R01HD042280, R01HD083273,
 
R01HD099090, F32HD104478, & 
T32HD087166
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 23

--- PAGE 24 matched=['Goal\n3', 'STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Goal
3
Setting the Foundation 
for Healthy Pregnancies 
and Lifelong Wellness
Goal Statement
Improve pregnancy 
outcomes to maximize the 
lifelong health of women 
and their children. 
24 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 25 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Research Opportunities
Pregnancy can be both a joyous and 
challenging time for families. Although 
most babies are born healthy, 
around 10 percent of infants in the 
United States are born preterm, and 
thousands of families are devastated 
by stillbirth. Pregnancy complications, 
such as preeclampsia, gestational 
diabetes, postpartum hemorrhage, 
and thromboembolism, endanger the 
health of women and infants. Pregnant 
women with pre-existing chronic 
conditions often do not have adequate 
scientific evidence about how their 
condition and its treatment may affect 
their infant.
NICHD continues to prioritize 
interdisciplinary research on preterm 
birth, with a focus on prevention. The 
institute is also focused on finding new 
ways to support preterm infants in 
the neonatal intensive care unit, and 
assessing the long-term outcomes 
from prematurity. By using advanced 
analytic techniques, researchers 
can assess how genetic, social, 
behavioral, and environmental factors 
affect pregnancy. Advances in this 
area can help scientists determine 
the biological underpinnings of 
pregnancy complications and identify 
new strategies to prevent maternal 
morbidity and mortality. The institute’s 
scientific research programs can 
take advantage of large datasets 
and advanced analytical methods 
such as AI to better pinpoint how 
pre-pregnancy characteristics and 
experiences during pregnancy can 
increase or decrease risk. Further study 
of the placenta, especially focused on 
how the placenta can protect maternal 
and fetal health, will play a key role in 
supporting this goal.
Because many women experience 
poor health outcomes in the 
postpartum period, NICHD will 
emphasize research on postpartum 
maternal health, including the long-
term consequences of conditions 
that have their roots in pregnancy, 
childbirth, and postpartum health. 
Close attention to health disparities 
in maternal and infant health is 
also essential to addressing the 
unacceptably high rates of maternal 
mortality, stillbirth, and preterm birth 
in the United States. NICHD will 
support partnership approaches in 
which research teams work with local 
communities to address factors that 
can lead to preventable pregnancy-
related morbidity or death for those 
at highest risk, including residents of 
geographic areas with limited access 
to maternal health care.
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 25

--- PAGE 26 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Scientific Objectives and Priorities
 » Capitalize on interdisciplinary 
collaborations to advance 
knowledge of the mechanisms 
and potential causes of 
preterm birth and to develop 
prevention approaches.
 » Improve the long-term 
outcomes of infants 
born preterm or with 
aberrant fetal growth by 
understanding the roles of 
maternal and paternal factors, 
social determinants of health, 
environmental and nutritional 
factors, and early interventions.
 » Use advanced analytical 
techniques to integrate and 
analyze diverse types of data, 
including genomic, social, 
behavioral, and/or exposure 
data, to inform interventions for 
adverse maternal conditions and 
complications of pregnancy.
 » Support community-informed 
research to develop maternal 
health interventions that are widely 
applicable, with an emphasis 
on populations experiencing 
health disparities.
 » Use innovative basic and 
translational science approaches 
to further understand the 
placenta, including its role in 
pregnancy outcomes and the 
long-term health of the mother 
and infant. Continue to develop 
technologies and methods for 
human placental models across 
gestation and test the ability of 
emerging technologies to assess 
placental health.
 » Develop prevention strategies for 
labor and delivery complications 
that contribute to maternal 
morbidity and mortality.
 » With an emphasis on populations 
that experience health disparities, 
identify new approaches to 
mitigate maternal and paternal 
risk factors for pregnancy-
associated conditions with 
effects that extend through the 
postpartum period and beyond.
26 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 27 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Ultrasound images show fetal 
(upper left) and maternal  
(lower right) placental 
vasculature in pink, purple,  
and white. Credit: R. Horgan,  
et al. 
DOI: 10.1002/uog.26312. 
Funding: R01HD086313
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 27

--- PAGE 28 matched=['Goal\n4', 'STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Goal
4
Improving Child and 
Adolescent Health 
and the Transition 
to Adulthood
Goal Statement
Advance understanding of 
contemporary typical and 
atypical child development, 
with an emphasis on identifying 
sensitive time periods when 
prevention and treatment strategies 
will have the greatest impact on lifelong 
health and wellness. Improve the transition 
from adolescent to adult health care, especially 
for adolescents with disabilities or chronic 
health conditions, and strengthen the evidence 
base for pediatric primary care.
28 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 29 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Research Opportunities
Many facets of lifelong health 
have deep roots in childhood and 
adolescence, yet the accelerated 
pace of societal and technological 
change makes it challenging to 
pinpoint exactly how specific 
biological, social, environmental, and 
other factors contribute to health and 
disease across the lifespan. NICHD 
researchers are working to understand 
the developmental impacts of nutrition, 
physical activity, sleep, digital media 
exposure, the microbiome, and other 
factors. The timing of these exposures 
and the opportunity to prevent or 
mitigate poor outcomes is a major 
focus for NICHD’s pediatric research 
portfolio. Identifying optimal time 
periods for intervention after critical 
illness or traumatic injury can yield 
new approaches to understanding 
plasticity and promoting functional 
adaptation. Throughout this work, 
there will be a continued focus on 
social determinants of health and the 
impact of health disparities on the 
effectiveness of interventions.
NICHD will lead efforts to improve 
the transition of adolescents to adult 
health care providers, especially for 
those with chronic conditions or 
illnesses, disabilities, or childhood 
exposures that require special 
consideration, such as exposure to 
trauma or violence. NICHD’s focus on 
improving this transition and exploring 
methods to enable self-management 
and encourage adherence among 
adolescents, as well as ways to 
enhance adult provider knowledge 
of pediatric conditions, will also 
involve coordination and collaboration 
with NIH institutes and centers and 
other organizations that specialize 
in specific diseases or conditions. 
The institute also plans a renewed 
emphasis on strengthening the 
evidence base for pediatric primary 
care practice. Pediatric primary care, 
including well-child visits, provides 
an essential foundation for lifelong 
health. However, pediatric primary 
care encounters are time-limited, 
and busy providers must prioritize 
among many elements, including 
anticipatory guidance, sick-child care, 
parent education, and developmental 
screenings. Moreover, because 
pediatric primary care tends to focus 
on preventing negative outcomes, 
documenting the effect of primary 
care interventions can be difficult 
for scientists. NICHD will focus 
on developing new methods and 
measures to help identify, refine, 
and implement the most effective 
elements of primary care practice.
  
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 29

--- PAGE 30 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
 
Scientific Objectives and Priorities
» Identify and assess  
risk-reduction strategies to 
address the systemic, as 
well as individual, causes 
of infant morbidity and 
mortality domestically and 
globally. Identify potential 
approaches to prevent 
stillbirth, sudden infant 
death syndrome, and sudden 
unexpected infant death.
 » Determine how social and 
environmental contextual 
factors affect infant, child, and 
adolescent health, and use 
this knowledge to develop 
new strategies and improve 
the effectiveness of current 
approaches to early intervention.
 » Develop and assess prevention, 
treatment, and implementation 
strategies to address trauma, 
injury (unintentional and 
intentional), child maltreatment, 
and violence, along with disaster 
preparedness and response. 
Advance research and training 
across the continuum of care 
to optimize recovery of children 
and families who experience 
critical illness or traumatic injury.
 » Increase understanding of 
physical, cognitive, social, and 
emotional development from 
infancy through adolescence to 
optimize timing of interventions 
supporting child health and 
development.
 » Conduct research to support 
better integration of pediatric 
and adult systems of care, 
especially for youth transitioning 
to adult health care, including 
children with disabilities. 
Develop measures that help 
determine successful transition 
at the individual, provider, or 
system level to improve care for 
adolescents and emerging adults.
 » Enhance the evidence base for 
pediatric and adolescent primary 
care by identifying practices and 
features of health care delivery 
associated with positive child 
health outcomes. Support 
dissemination and implementation 
research for pediatric prevention 
strategies with demonstrated 
efficacy, especially in populations 
that experience health disparities.
30 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 31 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 31

--- PAGE 32 matched=['Goal\n5', 'STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Goal
5
Fostering Safe and Effective 
Therapeutics and Devices for 
Pregnant Women, Lactating 
Women, Children, and  
People with Disabilities
Goal Statement
Lead efforts to develop, 
test, and evaluate new and 
existing therapeutics and 
devices to identify safe and 
effective solutions that meet 
the unique needs of pregnant 
women, lactating women, 
children, and people with 
physical, developmental, and 
intellectual disabilities.  
32 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 33 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN', 'research area'] ---
Research Opportunities
Pregnant women, lactating 
women, children, and people 
with disabilities often interact with 
medication and other therapeutics 
differently, compared to most adults. 
Pharmaceuticals may clear from the 
body more rapidly in some of these 
populations, necessitating a higher 
dose to be effective. For other drugs, 
active ingredients may accumulate in 
the blood for longer periods, requiring 
a lower dose for safety. Devices 
designed for adults may be ineffective 
for children, even if scaled down to fit 
smaller bodies. Furthermore, devices 
designed to serve a general population 
may not be accessible for people 
with disabilities.
For people with disabilities, medications 
may have side effects that interact 
dangerously with their disability, 
such as adversely affecting blood 
pressure in those with spinal cord 
injuries. Research to describe precisely 
how therapeutics affect specialized 
populations is urgently needed. Without 
these data, pregnant or lactating 
women who take medications for 
chronic health conditions do not have 
enough information to assess whether 
and at what dose these treatments are 
appropriate and, importantly, neither 
do their health care providers. At the 
same time, leaving a chronic condition 
untreated could seriously harm a 
pregnant woman, the fetus, or both.
Advances in pharmacogenomics, 
bioinformatics, data linkages, AI, 
and other innovative methods now 
make it possible to better understand 
how factors such as obesity, nutrition, 
and environmental exposures affect 
the action of medications. Applying 
responsible AI, bioinformatics, and 
data-linkage methods to large-
scale data has great potential to 
advance the study of pharmaceuticals 
specifically in pregnant women, 
lactating women, children, and 
people with disabilities. Ultimately, 
this research will be essential to help 
health care providers tailor treatments 
to the needs of the individual. There 
are very few incentives for industry to 
conduct such research, especially for 
off-patent drugs or devices, making 
the government’s role in this research 
even more critical.
NICHD will continue to lead research 
efforts to establish the scientific 
evidence needed for effective 
treatment of pregnant women, 
lactating women, children, and people 
with disabilities. This research area 
encompasses all types of medical 
treatment, including pharmaceuticals, 
behavioral interventions, and medical 
devices. These efforts will require 
multidisciplinary collaboration among 
researchers in fields such as computer 
science, AI, engineering, genetics and 
genomics, pediatrics, obstetrics, and 
other clinical professions.
Natalie, left, was born 
with a rare disease that 
causes generalized 
artery calcification and 
autosomal recessive 
hypophosphatemic 
rickets type 2. Parents 
Anne (middle) and 
Jerry join Natalie in 
speaking at a 2024 
National Advisory Child 
Health and Human 
Development Council 
meeting about the 
importance of NICHD 
research. Credit: NIH
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 33

--- PAGE 34 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Scientific Objectives and Priorities
 » Conduct and support foundational research on 
the development of interventions targeted to the 
specific needs of pregnant women, lactating 
women, children, and/or people with 
disabilities informed by pharmacokinetic, 
pharmacodynamic, pharmacogenomic, 
dosing, and formulation studies.
 » Identify and validate biomarkers, modeling 
approaches, and outcome measures 
that can be used to support rigorous 
testing and/or regulatory approval of 
pharmacotherapies and devices in pregnant 
women, lactating women, children, and/or 
people with disabilities.
 » Support clinical research and dissemination  
and implementation research to evaluate scalable, 
accessible therapeutics, diagnostics, and medical 
devices for pregnant women, lactating women, 
children, and/or people with disabilities.
 » Use advanced data science techniques (including 
AI and bioinformatics) to assess health outcomes, 
therapeutic safety and effectiveness, patient 
engagement, and health care delivery in datasets 
that include pregnant women, lactating women, 
children, and/or people with disabilities.
Gyorgy Levay, who lost 
both of his hands and 
feet to an infection, 
uses a prosthetic arm 
to drink from a cup. 
Mr. Levay works with 
NICHD small-business 
grantee Rahul Kaliki, 
Ph.D. (R44HD090811), 
to develop specialized 
solutions for those with 
upper limb loss and/or 
differences. Credit: Infinite 
Biomedical Technologies
34 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 35 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
MRI scan shows the fetus and 
placental compartments—
intervillous space (red), placental 
vessels (green), and placental 
tissue (blue). Credit: Z. Sun, et al. 
DOI: 10.1002/uog.24959.  
Funding: R01HD094381
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 35

--- PAGE 36 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Aspirational 
Goals
36 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 37 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN', 'mission'] ---
NICHD has set aspirational goals 
to encourage innovation in areas 
relevant to its mission. Though they 
are ambitious and potentially beyond 
reach by 2030, these goals are 
intended to serve as a call to action 
for the scientific community, urging 
researchers to work across disciplines 
and undertake novel approaches 
to deepen our understanding of 
human development and improve the 
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of 
specific diseases and conditions.
The following aspirational goals 
encourage the field to accelerate 
scientific discovery, work beyond 
traditional boundaries, and collaborate 
on research that could lead to healthier 
and more optimal lives for everyone.
 » Build upon advances in 
developmental biology to improve 
function for people with acquired or 
congenital neurologic impairment.
 » Use emerging technologies to 
advance human limb regeneration 
by activating the body’s growth 
processes.
 » Identify properties of menstrual 
effluent and semen that could 
facilitate diagnosis of diseases and 
disorders, including gynecologic 
and andrologic conditions.
 » Accelerate efforts to definitively 
diagnose, prevent, and treat 
endometriosis.
 » Advance effective diagnostics and 
interventions to prevent and treat 
preeclampsia and postpartum 
hemorrhage and help reduce 
maternal mortality in at-risk 
U.S. populations.
 » Develop new models and methods 
to inform research studies on the 
lactation process, the composition 
of human milk, and the impact of 
medications taken by the mother 
on breast milk.
 » Identify the pathophysiological 
mechanisms underlying stillbirth 
and develop and test approaches 
for stillbirth prevention.
 » Understand the mechanisms 
that lead to illness in preterm 
infants to improve survival and 
healthy development.
 » Leverage AI and other emerging 
technologies to establish an 
evidence base for pediatric and 
adolescent well care to prioritize 
and optimize prevention and 
treatment strategies.
 » Streamline the translational 
pipeline from basic research to 
clinical interventions to improve 
the health of infants, children, and 
adolescents by expanding the 
availability of gene therapies.
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 37

--- PAGE 38 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Research Capacity and 
Scientific Stewardship
NICHD recognizes the importance 
of maintaining public trust in its role 
as a steward of scientific research 
and resources. The institute works 
to equip and develop the current 
and future scientific workforce and to 
develop research tools, systems, and 
infrastructure that help investigators 
advance fundamental knowledge and 
scientific research priorities. Over the 
next five years, NICHD will continue 
its commitment to promoting diversity 
and inclusion within the scientific 
workforce, facilitating training and 
career development opportunities, 
strengthening scientific infrastructure 
and partnerships, providing 
transparency on performance, and 
ensuring public accountability.
Supporting Training and 
Career Development
NICHD maintains a fundamental 
commitment to research training and 
career development for all scientists, 
from students exploring the possibility 
of a research career to experienced 
research mentors. The institute puts 
this priority into practice by supporting 
extramural institutional and individual 
training grants, short courses, 
scientific training elements within 
research grants, and other programs, 
such as loan repayment. Within its 
intramural programs, NICHD’s support 
for hundreds of trainees has launched 
research careers all over the world. 
Effective and efficient stewardship 
of these programs is essential 
Aisling Macaraeg, a 
post-baccalaureate 
fellow in the 
Machner Lab at 
NICHD, presents 
her work using 
CRISPR-interference 
in Legionella 
pneumophila to 
identify genes 
involved in bacterial 
survival during 
infection. Credit: 
NICHD
38 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 39 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN', 'mission'] ---
to maximizing the return on our 
most valuable investment—the 
people who will carry the future of 
scientific research.
Facilitating Data Sharing and 
Access to Biospecimens
Good data stewardship and sharing 
are critical to trustworthy and 
equitable scientific research. NICHD 
will implement and refine a data 
strategy to maximize data sharing and 
enable responsible and innovative 
use of data and biospecimens that 
accelerates research and improves 
health for NICHD populations. 
NICHD will continue to integrate best 
practices in data stewardship and 
sharing into the scientific process 
and make strategic investments to 
enhance the accessibility, usability, 
interoperability, and sustainability of 
the NICHD data ecosystem, promote 
the responsible use of data science 
and AI technologies, and bolster data 
strategy expertise within the internal 
NICHD workforce.
Partnering to Enhance 
Science
Partnerships provide the opportunity to 
enhance existing resources, recruit the 
expertise and skills needed to benefit 
science, expand projects, leverage 
existing infrastructure, and improve 
recruitment and retention of participants 
in clinical research. NICHD will augment 
and strengthen its science by entering 
into a range of agreements with several 
public and private entities, including 
not-for-profits, professional societies, 
and foundations. Continued leadership 
of NIH-wide committees, task forces, 
and consortia will also allow the institute 
to advance its strategic mission and 
priorities through collaboration with other 
NIH institutes, centers, and offices. In 
addition, partnerships with other federal 
agencies will allow NICHD to expand its 
efforts to provide the evidence base for 
future policies and programs that benefit 
its communities.
The Ladder, created 
by Mary Ellen Scherl 
and located at the 
North entrance of the 
NIH Clinical Center, 
represents the ever-
increasing role of 
genome sequencing 
in newborn care. 
From left: Eric Green, 
M.D., Ph.D.; John 
Constantino, M.D.; 
artist Mary Ellen 
Scherl; NICHD Director 
Diana W. Bianchi, M.D.; 
James Gilman, M.D.; 
and Frank Piatkowski, 
A.I.A. Credit: NIH
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 39

--- PAGE 40 matched=['strategic \nplan', 'mission'] ---
Prioritization and Governance
As NICHD implements its strategic 
plan, there is a need to ensure that 
its budget can advance strategic 
objectives while balancing the need 
to fund science that furthers its 
mission. NICHD plans to emphasize 
external involvement in achieving this 
balance, by relying on the institute’s 
advisory bodies and working with 
communities, advocates, and those 
with lived experience to bring a variety 
of perspectives to inform prioritization. 
Governance processes within the 
institute will be updated carefully to 
ensure the flexibility needed to respond 
to emerging public health concerns 
and scientific opportunities.
Advancing Health Equity 
in Scientific Research 
Infrastructure, Workforce, 
and Communications
NICHD remains committed to 
advancing optimal health for all people 
by supporting the scientific workforce 
and implementing initiatives throughout 
NICHD’s extramural and intramural 
scientific programs. Efforts will span 
the array of disciplines relevant to the 
institute’s mission, including strategies 
to broaden participation in NICHD 
research. NICHD will continue to 
cultivate investigators at critical stages 
of their research careers and support 
an inclusive workforce across the full 
range of biomedical, biobehavioral, 
and clinical sciences. NICHD’s goal to 
promote a robust scientific workforce 
will require the collective efforts of 
research and training experts across 
the institute. Partnerships and effective 
communication strategies will also 
be needed to expand and strengthen 
outreach and engagement efforts 
to make NICHD research, funding, 
career development, and training 
opportunities more accessible for all.
Clinical Research Oversight 
and Management
NIH is committed to responsible 
stewardship, accountability, oversight, 
and transparency of clinical research 
and clinical trials supported by the 
agency. NICHD will continue efforts in 
its extramural and intramural research 
programs to ensure appropriate 
funding mechanisms and infrastructure, 
milestone planning and progress 
From Wheels to 
Walking in Pittsburgh. 
Lily Rosenblum’s 
winning entry in the 
2023 NICHD-led 
youth original artwork 
competition highlights 
the strengths 
of communities 
that face health 
disparities. Inspired 
by a friend who 
went from using 
a wheelchair to 
walking, the bridge 
represents a golden 
path to potential 
opportunities.
40 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 41 matched=['strategic plan'] ---
review, ongoing risk management, and 
public sharing of clinical trials data. 
Clinical research supported by the 
institute will continue to reflect NICHD’s 
priority on appropriate inclusion of a 
wide range of populations in research, 
including pregnant women, lactating 
women, children, and people with 
disabilities. Careful and complete 
monitoring and documentation of 
participant data will ensure appropriate 
recruitment and retention.
Planning, Reporting, and 
Program Evaluation
NICHD regularly reviews and 
rigorously evaluates its scientific 
research and training programs to 
ensure effectiveness and transparent 
stewardship of research investments. 
NICHD is committed to enhancing its 
ability to monitor the implementation 
of the strategic plan and continuously 
improve alignment of institute activities 
with overall strategy. The institute will 
enhance its ability to track, analyze, 
and report on the activities of complex 
scientific research and training 
programs; pursue new methods to 
analyze information on stakeholder 
participation and perspectives; gather 
wide-ranging data on the impact 
of scientific, organizational, and 
community collaborations; and develop 
and implement objective assessments 
of scientific results and public health 
effects. Portfolio analysis and program 
evaluation will inform the development, 
implementation, and reporting of 
NICHD efforts and accomplishments.
Facilitating Transparency and 
Communication
NICHD communications activities 
help convey the goals, results, and 
health impact of taxpayer-funded 
research, reinforcing to the public 
and other audiences the benefits of 
their continued investment. NICHD 
will continue to seek new ways to 
reach its many audiences through 
an array of vehicles, including media 
engagement, content development, 
social media messaging, and other 
approaches. The institute will also 
collaborate with NIH to streamline 
Freedom of Information Act processes 
and improve fulfillment of document 
requests. NICHD’s legislative and  
public policy efforts include 
engagement with and outreach to its 
many communities about the institute’s 
wide range of research activities. The 
institute will convey the significance 
and value of the research it conducts 
and supports so that the public 
understands how NICHD uses funds 
to improve health, thus allowing new 
legislation and policies to better reflect 
and facilitate the institute’s efforts.
Federal health 
leaders, including 
NICHD Deputy 
Director Alison 
Cernich, Ph.D., and 
advocates gather for 
a stillbirth prevention 
event at the White 
House in July 2024. 
Credit: HHS
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 41

--- PAGE 42 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN', 'mission'] ---
Operational Priorities, 
Management, 
and Accountability
NICHD’s success in its scientific 
endeavors depends on the institute’s 
success in management and 
administration. Effective program 
management, in which decisions 
are based on careful analysis, will 
allow NICHD to maximize the value 
of its scientific initiatives. Innovation 
in administrative functions will help 
NICHD adapt rapidly to changing 
needs and requirements and allow 
programs to take advantage of the 
growth opportunities presented by 
advanced technologies and new 
collaborations. NICHD will enhance 
its ability to manage for results, 
develop its workforce, and create 
excellence in performing administrative 
responsibilities, creating an innovative 
administrative culture that can 
proactively and effectively support 
NICHD’s scientific mission.
Promoting Workforce 
Development and Balance 
The work performed at NICHD 
requires staff to demonstrate a wide 
range of technical skills, knowledge, 
and adaptability to continually develop 
and adjust to fast-paced changes. The 
institute will enhance the recruitment 
and development of its workforce 
through systematic and thoughtful 
initiatives aimed at growing leadership, 
supervisory, technical, and scientific 
skills to meet current and future 
organizational needs. Over the next 
five years, NICHD will focus strongly 
on developing innovative approaches 
to knowledge management, career 
development, staff engagement, 
recognition, and recruitment of highly 
qualified individuals.
Jeffrey Farrell, 
Ph.D. (center), 
stands with 
members of 
his laboratory, 
the Unit on Cell 
Specification and 
Differentiation. 
Credit: NICHD
42 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 43 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Enhancing Infrastructure 
Innovation
More than ever, effective management 
depends on essential infrastructure 
such as facilities, scientific equipment, 
and high-quality data and information 
technology resources. This infrastructure 
must not remain static but must adapt to 
the changing needs of institute programs 
and staff. At the same time, sustainability 
is necessary for effective stewardship. 
To accomplish this goal, NICHD will 
focus on capitalizing on existing 
resources, innovating, anticipating 
the potential needs of the workforce, 
and leveraging ongoing efforts and 
resources throughout NIH to ensure 
operational efficiency.
Improving Administrative 
Efficiency
NICHD aims to improve and streamline 
administrative management and 
processes while maintaining the highest 
standards and quality of service. NICHD 
will continue to develop as a learning 
organization that anticipates change, 
adapts readily to changing needs and 
mandates, and leverages data to inform 
decision making. NICHD will identify 
opportunities to reduce the administrative 
burden on scientific staff by streamlining 
and automating processes.
Advancing Enterprise Risk 
Management
As the environment supporting 
biomedical research has become 
increasingly complex and the pace of 
change has accelerated, NICHD has 
evolved its risk management approach 
to ensure prompt, appropriate 
assessment of internal and external 
risks. Working with NIH leadership, 
NICHD will continue to evaluate 
its administrative, operational, and 
scientific programs and improve 
management practices. NICHD will 
focus on the ability to adapt risk 
management best practices to confront 
and address emerging issues by 
adjusting standardized procedures over 
time to accommodate changing risk 
levels and types.
NICHD’s 2024 
Combined Federal 
Campaign Cornhole 
Cheerleaders include 
(left to right) Sybil 
Philip, Deserae 
Philpott, Kimberly 
Kober, Jessica Wu, 
Rodney Rivera, and 
Elizabeth Walsh, Ph.D. 
Credit: NICHD
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 43

--- PAGE 44 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Appendix 1: NICHD Statutory Authority
42 U.S.C. §285g: Purpose 
of the Institute
The general purpose of the 
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development (hereafter 
in this subpart referred to as the 
“Institute”) is the conduct and 
support of research, training, health 
information dissemination, and 
other programs with respect to 
gynecologic health, maternal health, 
child health, intellectual disabilities, 
human growth and development 
(including prenatal development), 
population research, and special 
health problems and requirements 
of mothers and children.
Establishment
The early years of President John 
F. Kennedy’s administration were 
influenced by senior advisors, 
notably his sister, Eunice Kennedy 
Shriver. Mrs. Shriver championed 
the acceptance of people with 
intellectual and developmental 
disabilities (IDDs), while also 
advocating for research to address the 
health needs of those with IDDs.
In 1961, Dr. Robert E. Cooke, a 
pediatrician and another advisor 
to President Kennedy, chaired a 
task force on the health and well-
being of children. Among the task 
force’s recommendations was the 
establishment of a new institute within 
the NIH. Despite skepticism from 
some leaders at NIH on the need 
for a separate institute on children, 
the law establishing the National 
Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development (NICHD) was signed on 
October 17, 1962. NICHD became 
the first NIH institute to focus on 
health throughout human life, rather 
than on a specific disease or organ 
system. From its inception, NICHD 
targeted its efforts toward helping the 
scientific community, policy makers, 
and public recognize the importance 
of supporting research not only to help 
those with IDDs, but also to increase 
understanding of human development.
Purpose
Since 1962, NICHD’s statutory 
“purpose” has only been amended 
three times. In 2000, the phrase 
“gynecologic health” was added. In 
2007, the institute’s official name was 
changed to the “Eunice Kennedy 
Shriver National Institute of Child 
Health and Human Development” to 
honor the contributions of Mrs. Shriver. 
NICHD Director Diana 
W. Bianchi, M.D. 
(center), joins Maria 
Shriver and Timothy 
Shriver, Ph.D., at an 
event for the White 
House Initiative on 
Women’s Health 
Research in 2024. 
Credit: NICHD
44 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 45 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
In 2010, another law was passed that 
updated NICHD’s statutory language 
to change all references from “mental 
retardation” to “intellectual disabilities.” 
In addition, in 1990, Congress 
established the National Center for 
Medical Rehabilitation Research within 
NICHD to support research, training, 
and dissemination of health information 
on the rehabilitation of people with 
physical disabilities. This program 
was reauthorized in 2016 by the 21st 
Century Cures Act.
Other Statutory Directives
Other provisions of the Public Health 
Service Act specifically direct NICHD 
to support certain areas of research 
in addition to the general mandates 
governing NIH. Among these 
provisions, which became law at 
different points during NICHD’s history, 
are research on sudden infant death 
syndrome, intellectual disabilities, 
contraception, and infertility; 
intramural research on obstetrics and 
gynecology; child health research 
centers; studies on both adolescent 
health and children’s health; research 
centers on Fragile X syndrome; and 
pediatric research training.
More recently, Congress has provided 
directives to the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services (HHS) or to 
NIH, with the understanding that 
NICHD would be charged with their 
implementation. One example, first 
passed in 2000, is the directive for 
NIH to create a program of research 
for conducting pediatric clinical trials 
with the aim of obtaining pediatric 
labeling on drugs often prescribed 
to children (Best Pharmaceuticals 
for Children Act). Among other 
provisions of the Newborn 
Screening Saves Lives Act, NIH is 
directed to coordinate and expand 
research on newborn screening 
(Hunter Kelly Newborn Screening 
Research Program). A provision of 
the 21st Century Cures Act directed 
the HHS Secretary to establish a 
Task Force on Research Specific 
to Pregnant Women and Lactating 
Women (PRGLAC) to identify 
the research needed to inform 
appropriate dosing of medications 
used by these populations. The 
Fiscal Year 2022 Consolidated 
Appropriations Act (P .L. 117-103) 
directed the HHS Secretary to 
develop a task force on stillbirth 
in the United States and the 
Fiscal Year 2023 Consolidated 
Appropriations Act (P .L. 117-
328) continued the work of that 
task force. The Fiscal Year 2023 
Consolidated Appropriations Act 
(P .L. 117-328) included funding 
and language for HHS to create an 
advisory committee to monitor and 
report on the implementation of the 
PRGLAC recommendations.
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 45

--- PAGE 46 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN', 'mission', 'Division of '] ---
Appendix 2: 
NICHD Organization and Functions
The Division of Extramural 
Research (DER) develops, 
implements, and coordinates cross-
cutting, multidisciplinary research 
activities within NICHD’s mission. 
DER supports this research through 
grants and contracts to colleges, 
universities, medical schools, 
hospitals, and small businesses.
The Division of Intramural Research 
(DIR) conducts laboratory, clinical, 
and population-based research to 
seek fundamental knowledge about 
the nature and behavior of living 
systems. The Division of Population 
Health Research within DIR designs 
and conducts innovative etiologic 
and interventional research to 
promote health and well-being of 
all populations, including vulnerable 
subgroups such as pregnant women, 
infants, and children.
The Division of Extramural Activities 
(DEA) is responsible for administering 
and coordinating the implementation 
of the institute’s research grant and 
training programs. Activities conducted 
within DEA include initial scientific merit 
review of research grant applications 
and contract proposals, assistance 
with advisory council activities and 
meetings, grants management, 
extramural staff training, and enhancing 
NICHD-wide understanding of 
standardized approaches, policies, 
methods, and procedures.
The National Center for Medical 
Rehabilitation Research (NCMRR) 
aims to foster development of 
scientific knowledge to enhance the 
health, productivity, independence, 
and quality of life of people with 
physical disabilities through basic, 
translational, and clinical research.
The NICHD Office of the Director 
(OD) provides overall leadership, 
planning, direction, coordination, 
and evaluation of the institute’s 
research programs and activities. 
OD also develops and monitors 
internal policies and procedures to 
effectively and efficiently advance 
NICHD’s mission.
For a full organizational chart, visit 
http://bit.ly/NICHDOrgChart
46 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 47 matched=['STRATEGIC PLAN'] ---
Stanford University 
researchers, co-funded by 
NICHD (P41EB027060), 
demonstrate OpenCap, 
an open-source platform 
for measuring human 
movement dynamics 
using smartphone videos. 
Credit: Florent Vial
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 47

--- PAGE 48 matched=['scientific priorit', 'strategic plan'] ---
Appendix 3: Strategic Planning Process
The pace of scientific and 
technological progress demand that 
NICHD refresh its strategic plan to 
capitalize on new opportunities to 
accelerate basic, translational, and 
clinical research. In October 2023, the 
institute embarked on a collaborative 
process with internal and external 
experts to identify priorities and 
inform future investments in research, 
training, and infrastructure. The 
process for refreshing the NICHD 
strategy was guided by three core 
principles: transparency, decision 
making informed by evidence, and 
external participation.
For the NICHD Strategic Plan 2025, 
NICHD updated priorities to reflect 
public health trends and progress 
since the publication of the previous 
plan, while maintaining the structure 
of the NICHD Strategic Plan 2020. 
The overarching goal of the process 
was to identify scientific priority areas 
in which NICHD can lead, harness 
new technologies and methods 
to address health disparities, 
promote health equity, and improve 
the health of the institute’s primary 
populations: children, women, and 
people with disabilities.
The refresh started with reviewing 
progress from the prior plan and 
discussing emerging areas of 
opportunity and importance to 
validate existing priorities and 
identify new ones across three focus 
areas: scientific research, scientific 
stewardship, and management and 
accountability. The strategic planning 
During the 
NICHD: 60 Years 
of Innovation  
virtual symposium 
on October 17, 
2022, NICHD’s 
Valerie Maholmes, 
Ph.D. (lower left), 
moderates the 
session on Raising 
Healthy Children. 
Top left: Wendy 
Chung, M.D., Ph.D.; 
top right: Audrey 
Odom John, M.D., 
Ph.D.; lower right: 
Kenneth Dodge, 
Ph.D. Far upper 
right: sign language 
interpreter.
48 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 49 matched=['research goal', 'cross-cutting theme', 'strategic plan'] ---
process entailed three phases: 
1.) formation of working groups, 
2.) external engagement, and 
3.) incorporating feedback and  
finalizing the plan.
Formation of Working Groups
To guide the strategic plan refresh, 
NICHD established working groups 
charged with identifying the priorities 
to highlight in the strategic plan. Of 
the seven working groups, five were 
focused on scientific research (one 
for each scientific research goal), one 
on scientific stewardship, and one 
on management and accountability. 
The NICHD Executive Committee 
nominated members for the seven 
working groups based on members’ 
knowledge of relevant extramural and 
intramural research portfolios and 
familiarity with the goal areas. The 
Executive Committee also provided 
initial direction by delineating potential 
emerging priority areas for working 
groups to examine. At predetermined 
milestones, the Executive Committee 
reviewed and advised on updated 
priorities the working groups identified.
Given the length and complexity of 
the focus areas, the scientific research 
working groups met on a structured, 
recurring cadence (bi-monthly at 
minimum). Ad hoc meetings were 
held for scientific stewardship and 
management and accountability 
working groups. The Executive 
Committee identified champions for 
each cross-cutting theme in addition 
to the working groups. Champions 
were responsible for identifying and 
proposing priorities related to their 
theme across scientific research 
objectives and aspirational goals. To 
ensure representation throughout 
the strategic plan, champions served 
as members of relevant scientific 
research working groups. Cross-
cutting theme champions were 
engaged throughout the process to 
provide feedback on representation of 
their theme across the strategic plan.
The scientific research working groups 
began their efforts by conducting 
a detailed data-informed review 
of progress made on the NICHD 
Strategic Plan 2020. Working groups 
considered major programs and 
funding opportunities to understand 
grant spending trends and how 
upcoming programs and opportunities 
may impact research areas. They 
also reviewed representation of 
the cross-cutting themes in the 
scientific research goals, noting well-
represented areas and opportunities 
to increase representation in the 
refreshed strategic plan. These initial 
efforts helped steer the priorities 
of the strategic plan and provided 
direction for planned external 
engagement opportunities. 
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 49

--- PAGE 50 matched=['research goal', 'cross-cutting theme', 'strategic plan'] ---
External Engagement
External feedback was essential 
to the strategic planning process. 
NICHD’s planning process intentionally 
outlined three key avenues for 
soliciting external feedback to identify 
and confirm the refreshed strategic 
priorities: listening sessions focused 
on each of the five scientific research 
goals, an update to the National 
Advisory Child Health and Human 
Development (NACHHD) Council, and 
a public Request for Information (RFI) 
on the updated priorities.
In July 2024, NICHD engaged 
external researchers in five structured 
listening sessions, one for each of the 
scientific research goals. Attendees 
were invited based on their expertise 
in the scientific research goal area 
and knowledge of NICHD’s portfolio. 
Working groups developed and 
presented draft concepts for each 
scientific research goal, providing 
attendees with the opportunity to offer 
feedback and ask clarifying questions. 
Attendees were encouraged to 
share novel research opportunities 
not represented in the goals, directly 
informing further iteration of the 
concepts. Following the listening 
sessions, working groups constructed 
draft research objectives, taking 
feedback from the listening session 
into account. These draft research 
objectives were subsequently 
reviewed and refined by the 
Executive Committee.
In fall 2024, the NACHHD Council 
received an update on the refreshed 
strategic plan, including an overview 
of the strategic planning process to-
date and the draft scientific research 
objectives. This presentation coincided 
with the release of the RFI, which 
summarized research opportunities for 
each scientific research goal and the 
updated cross-cutting themes. Council 
members provided feedback on the 
draft objectives, noting areas that 
required clearer emphasis within 
the plan, including endometriosis, 
digital media and technology use, 
and judicious use of AI. NICHD 
gave due consideration to each 
piece of feedback provided by the 
NACHHD Council and made updates 
as appropriate.
In August 2024, the institute 
published an RFI on the draft priorities 
for the NICHD Strategic Plan 2025. 
The RFI (NOT-HD-24-028) solicited 
feedback on the scientific research 
goals and opportunities from a 
large external audience, including 
academia and industry, scientific 
and professional organizations, and 
health care professionals. The notice 
contained background information 
on the purpose of the strategic 
plan refresh and summaries of the 
prioritized areas of opportunity within 
each of the scientific research goals. 
The RFI also included brief overviews 
of the cross-cutting themes, given 
their relevance to the scientific 
research goals.
The RFI was open for a 44-day 
review period and obtained a total 
of 170 relevant responses; 131 
responses were from individuals from 
85 different academic and research 
institutions. Thirty-nine responses 
50 |  NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025

--- PAGE 51 matched=['research goal', 'cross-cutting theme', 'strategic plan'] ---
were on behalf of societies, advocacy 
groups, and government agencies or 
government contractors. Across these 
170 responses, each piece of feedback 
was summarized and tagged to the 
most relevant research goal and/or 
cross-cutting theme. Comments were 
generally supportive of the direction of 
the plan and offered suggestions on 
clarifying important concepts. NICHD 
thoroughly reviewed and considered 
each piece of feedback and made 
updates to the plan as appropriate.
Incorporating Feedback and 
Finalizing the Plan
Working groups reviewed the feedback 
provided across external engagement 
opportunities, considering alignment 
to emerging priorities and NICHD’s 
mission. Edits were made to the 
draft strategic plan and the internal 
implementation plan. The updates 
were reviewed and approved by the 
Executive Committee.
NICHD leadership dedicated extensive 
consideration to the public health 
priorities that the institute will address 
over the next five years, including the 
representation of cross-cutting themes 
and the enhancement of scientific 
stewardship and management and 
accountability. In tandem with finalizing 
the objectives, all seven working groups 
began detailed internal implementation 
planning that defined specific activities 
designed to guide the institute in 
meeting the set objectives.
Future Progress
The institute considers the strategic 
plan to be part of an ongoing discussion 
with its research, advocacy, and policy 
communities, as well as the public. Over 
the next five years, NICHD will provide 
regular updates on its progress across 
these focus areas. NICHD has also 
defined metrics to measure success of 
implementation efforts and will track 
and report on those.
The institute 
promoted its 
NICHD: 60 Years 
of Innovation 
virtual symposium 
on various 
digital channels 
throughout 2022.
NICHD STRATEGIC PLAN 2025 | 51
