# NIDA (2022-2026) — file: NIDA_Strategic_Plan_2022-2026.pdf
# 54 pages matched priority-heading patterns


--- PAGE 1 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
Strategic Plan
National Institute on Drug Abuse
National Institutes of Health
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 

--- PAGE 3 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
Strategic Plan
National Institute on Drug Abuse
National Institute on Drug Abuse 
National Institutes of Health
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
6001 Executive Boulevard
Bethesda, MD 20892-9561

--- PAGE 5 matched=['Strategic Goal', 'CROSS-CUTTING PRIORIT', 'Vision'] ---
1
Contents
INTRODUCTION ...................................2
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................4
FOCUS ON PRESCRIPTION  
DRUGS ..................................................7
I. PREVENTION ..................................10
Strategic Goal ............................................. 10
Objectives .................................................. 10
Introduction––The Value of Research- 
Based Prevention Approaches ................... 10
Strategic Approaches to Prevention  
Research .....................................................12
 1.  How can NIDA research inform the  
  focus of prevention? ......................12
 2.  Why do some people become  
  addicted while others do not? ........12
 3.  Which parts of the brain are  
  involved in drug abuse? ................19
 4.  How are research results used  
  to improve practice? ......................19
Our Vision for the Future of Prevention  
of Drug Abuse and Addiction ....................21
II. TREATMENT ..................................21
Strategic Goal .............................................21
Objectives ..................................................21
Introduction––The Value of a Multipronged  
and Integrated Approach to Addiction  
Treatment ...................................................21
Strategic Approaches to Treatment ............22
 1. How can NIDA research help develop  
  and enhance medications and behavioral  
  therapies to reduce drug abuse and  
  prevent relapse? .............................23
 2. What if people have another mental  
  disorder—how does that affect treatment  
  for addiction? ................................29
 3.   How will treatments be tailored for  
  optimal effectiveness? ...................30
 4.   How will drug abuse treatment reach  
  the people who need it?  ................31
Our Vision for the Future of Treatment  
for Drug Abuse and Addiction ...................33
III. HIV/AIDS ........................................34
Strategic Goal .............................................34
Objectives ..................................................34
Introduction––The Need for Responsive  
Prevention and Treatment Strategies .........34
Strategic Approaches to HIV/AIDS  
Research .....................................................36
 1.   How has the HIV/AIDS epidemic 
  changed over the past few decades  
  in the United States?......................36
 2.   How does NIDA plan to focus research  
  efforts to better understand and prevent  
  HIV infection in drug abusers and limit  
  its progression?..............................37
 3.   What can be done to mitigate the  
  health disparities associated with  
  HIV/AIDS? ................................... 39
 4.   How is NIDA’s HIV research program  
  contributing to global HIV prevention  
  and treatment? ...............................40
 5. What are we doing to improve  
  HIV/AIDS treatment and outcomes in  
  drug abusers? .................................41
What Is NIDA’s Vision of the Future? ......43
IV. CROSS-CUTTING PRIORITIES ....44
Major Goals ...............................................44
 1.  What are other health conditions  
  that interact with drug abuse and  
  addiction? ......................................44
 2.   How is NIDA addressing health  
  disparities related to drug abuse  
  and its consequences? ...................45
 3.   How does NIDA “get the word out”  
  about the many facets of drug abuse and  
  addi

--- PAGE 6 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
2
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
Introduction
The mission of the National Institute on Drug Abuse 
(NIDA) is to lead the Nation in bringing the power of science 
to bear on drug abuse and addiction. This charge has two 
critical components: (1) to support and conduct research 
across a broad range of disciplines and (2) to ensure the 
rapid and effective dissemination and use of research results 
to improve practice and inform policy. The ultimate goal 
of NIDA’s drug abuse research program is to reduce the 
burden of drug abuse and addiction
* and their many adverse consequences 
for individuals and society at large. By advancing the science of addiction, 
NIDA is helping to change people’s perceptions, replacing stigma and shame 
with a new understanding of addiction as a treatable disease. Much like any 
other medical disease, addiction demands a public health solution.   
Indeed, NIDA-supported scientific advances over the past three decades 
have revolutionized our understanding of drug abuse and addiction. We 
have informed the development of more effective prevention and treatment 
approaches and have identified areas where more work is needed. For 
example, while our national research surveys show continuing declines 
in illicit drug use among teens––down 19 percent since 2001, according 
to NIDA’s 2009 Monitoring the Future (MTF) survey of 8th-, 10th-, and 
12th-graders––difficult challenges remain. These challenges include the 
persistence of chronic drug abuse in a considerable number of teens (e.g., 
5 percent of 12th-graders are daily marijuana users, a level statistically 
unchanged since 2001)
1 and the high rates of prescription drug abuse among 
both adolescents and adults. This trend has prompted a near-doubling of 
unintentional poisoning deaths nationwide since 1999,
2 mainly from opioid 
analgesic abuse (see “Emerging Issues and Challenges”).  
* “Drug abuse,” as used throughout this report, refers to the repeated use of licit or illicit psychoactive 
substances, which may or may not lead to “addiction,” which is defined as a complex brain disease 
characterized by compulsive, at times uncontrollable, drug craving, seeking, and use that persist even 
in the face of extremely negative consequences. These definitions differ from those in the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), which provides diagnostic criteria for drug abuse 
and dependence, and does not in its present form include the term “addiction.”  We use the term 
“addiction” to refer to what the DSM defines as “dependence.”   

--- PAGE 7 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
3
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
We must continue to aggressively meet these challenges and work to prevent 
the often devastating consequences of drug abuse and addiction that affect 
all segments of society. Economic costs alone are estimated to exceed one-
half trillion dollars annually in the United States—including health- and 
crime-related costs, as well as productivity losses, such as those stemming 
from workplace injuries and accidents. In 2008, 20 million Americans, or 8 
percent of the population, aged 12 or older were current (past-month)
 illicit 
drug users.3 Staggering as these numbers are, however, they do not fully 
describe the breadth of deleterious public health––and safety––implications, 
which include family disintegration, loss of employment, accidents, failure 
in school, and domestic violence and other crimes. Substance use and abuse 
can also exacerbate a variety of health problems, including the spread 
of infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases 
(STDs), tuberculosis, and hepatitis C. Frequently comorbid with other 
mental disorders, drug abuse also contributes significantly to the risk of 
suicide and suicidal behaviors.
4
It is plain to see that drug abuse is a ubiquitous, complex, and urgent 
problem that affects us all. Thus, NIDA continues to engage multiple 
stakeholders across the community in efforts to integrate substance abuse 
and addiction diagnosis, referral, and treatment into standard medical 
practice as well as criminal justice settings, where drug abuse problems are 
widespread. These settings offer good opportunities for treatment, which can 
have considerable societal impact.
The pages that follow describe broad strategies that NIDA plans to implement 
over the coming years. A flexible, dynamic approach allows us to adapt to 
changing needs and take advantage of scientific opportunities as they arise and 
are revealed through our ongoing research.
Nora D. V olkow, M.D. 
Director, NIDA

--- PAGE 8 matched=['Strategic goal', 'CROSS-CUTTING PRIORIT', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
4
Executive Summary
For the past three decades, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) has led the 
way in supporting research to prevent and treat drug abuse and addiction and mitigate 
the impact of their consequences, which include the spread of HIV/AIDS and other 
infectious diseases. To confront the most pressing aspects of this complex disease and 
to tackle its underlying causes, our strategic approach is necessarily a multipronged 
one. It takes advantage of research programs in basic, clinical, and translational 
sciences. This includes genetics, functional neuroimaging, social neuroscience, 
medication and behavioral therapies, prevention, and health services, including 
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness research. Our burgeoning portfolio has given us a large and 
growing body of knowledge that informs our strategic directions for the future. These directions 
are grouped into four major goal areas, reflected in the sections that follow:
I.  PREVENTION
II.  TREATMENT
III. HIV/AIDS
IV . CROSS-CUTTING PRIORITIES   
These four sections and accompanying strategic goals and objectives are summarized below.
I.  Prevention
Strategic goal: To prevent the initiation of drug use and the escalation to 
addiction in those who have already initiated use.  
Our prevention research has led to today’s 
improved understanding of addiction and 
has positioned NIDA to build upon solid 
epidemiological findings and new insights 
from genetics and neuroscience. Findings 
have revealed myriad contributors to 
addiction and the involvement of multiple 
brain circuits in addiction processes. A major 
goal of our efforts is to better understand 
why some people become addicted while 
others do not. Our prevention efforts 
encompass both illicit and licit drugs, such 
as nicotine and prescription medications. We 
support research that strives to identify the 
factors that put people at increased risk of 
drug abuse or protect them from it. Results 
will lead to more effective counterstrategies, 
particularly to prevent young people from 
ever using drugs in the first place. We are 
applying modern technologies (e.g., genetics 
and brain imaging tools) to our 
prevention studies and are devising creative 
and targeted communications strategies to 
encourage their use.  
NIDA’s Prevention Objectives Include:
1. To identify the characteristics and patterns 
of drug abuse.
2. To understand how genes, environment, 
and development influence the various 
risk and protective factors for drug abuse. 
3. To improve and expand our understanding 
of basic neurobiology as it relates to the 
brain circuitry underlying drug abuse and 
addiction.
4. To apply this knowledge toward the de-
velopment of more effective strategies to 
prevent people from ever taking drugs and 
from progressing to addiction if they do.

--- PAGE 9 matched=['Strategic goal', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
5
II. Treatment
Strategic goal: To develop successful treatments for drug abuse and addiction 
and improve treatment accessibility and implementation. 
Given the complex interactions of biological, 
social, environmental, and developmental 
factors that underlie drug abuse and 
addiction, NIDA acknowledges the need to 
take a “whole systems” approach to treating 
this disease. We are well-positioned to 
capitalize on recent discoveries that have 
uncovered an expanded range of possible 
brain targets that affect craving, euphoria, 
motivation, learning, memory, and inhibitory 
control––key contributors to addiction and 
relapse. To bring about more customized 
treatments, our comprehensive therapeutic 
research portfolio pushes for more effective 
medication and behavioral therapies. 
Innovative approaches that consider genetic 
variation, comorbid conditions (e.g., mental 
illness, chronic pain), and the addicted 
person’s changing needs over time will 
usher in promising medications to counteract 
drug-induced changes in the brain and 
enhance behavioral therapies. Effectiveness 
research helps us optimize strategies for 
disseminating and implementing research-
based treatments in health care and criminal 
justice settings. This objective requires that 
we continue to strengthen our productive 
partnerships with treatment practitioners, 
state substance abuse programs, and other 
Federal agencies to move proven treatments 
into clinical practice at the community level.  
NIDA’s Treatment Objectives Include:
1.  To develop effective medications and 
behavioral interventions to treat drug 
abuse and addiction and to prevent 
relapse.
2. To develop treatments for drug abuse and 
addiction in association with comorbid 
conditions.
3. To develop the knowledge that leads to 
personalized or customized treatments.
4. To translate research-based treatments to 
the community.
III. HIV/AIDS
Strategic goal: To diminish the spread of drug abuse-related human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and minimize the associated health and social 
consequences, including acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Drug abuse continues to be a major vector 
for the spread of HIV/AIDS through its 
connection with other risky behaviors, such 
as needle sharing and unprotected sex. Our 
research advances the less-acknowledged 
link between drug abuse in general and the 
resulting impaired judgment that can lead to 
risky sexual behavior and HIV transmission. 
This linkage highlights the value of drug 
abuse treatment in preventing the spread 
of HIV . We plan to continue supporting 
primary prevention research to find the most 
ef
fective HIV risk-reduction interventions 
for different populations. Young people are 
a major focus for these efforts, prompting 
strategies that start early and can be 
adapted as the individuals age. NIDA also 
supports research to develop effective 
secondary prevention strategies designed 
to reduce HIV transmission. This includes 
seeking out the best ways to incorporate 
HIV education, testing, counseling, and 
treatment referral, and supporting research 
to identify and overcome barriers such as 

--- PAGE 10 matched=['Cross-Cutting Priorit', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
6
stigma and access to treatment for HIV and 
drug abuse. NIDA also sponsors research to 
learn more about the multiple interactions that 
occur with neurological complications from 
HIV , substance abuse, and other comorbid 
psychiatric disorders. This knowledge can 
inform the development of more responsive 
counterinterventions. Additionally, we 
continue to target HIV/AIDS-related health 
disparities and integrate HIV/AIDS initiatives 
worldwide.  
NIDA’s HIV/AIDS Objectives Include:
1.  To support research to better understand 
the etiology, pathogenesis, and spread 
of HIV/AIDS among drug-abusing 
populations.
2. To help prevent the acquisition (primary 
prevention) and transmission (secondary 
prevention) of HIV among drug abusers 
and their partners.
3. To decrease the health disparities 
associated with HIV/AIDS.
4. To support international research on the 
intertwined epidemics of drug abuse and 
HIV/AIDS.
5. To improve HIV treatment and outcomes 
in drug abusers through a better under-
standing of interactions with drugs of 
abuse, HIV/AIDS disease processes, and 
the medications used to treat both.
IV. Cross-Cutting Priorities  
Several additional priority areas span NIDA’s portfolio and contribute to our 
overall mission to prevent or reduce drug abuse and addiction. These areas are 
highlighted below.
1.  To foster research on other health 
conditions that may inform, influence, 
or interact with drug abuse and addiction 
(e.g., pain, compulsive behavioral disor-
ders).
2. To decrease health disparities related to 
drug addiction and its consequences.
3. To educate a variety of audiences (e.g., 
criminal justice, medical, and educational 
systems in the community; media; and 
legislators) about the science underlying 
drug abuse.
4. To train and attract new investigators 
with diverse experiences––including 
those from minority or disadvantaged 
backgrounds––and to actively recruit 
chemists, physicists, bioengineers, and 
mathematicians to conduct translational 
research on drug abuse.
5. To promote collaborative international 
research activities that address nicotine 
addiction, HIV/AIDS, and emerging 
trends, as well as training and dissemina-
tion of science-based information on drug 
abuse.

--- PAGE 11 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic PlanNational Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
7
Focus on Prescription Drugs
Unlike illicit drug use, which shows a continuing downward trend, prescrip-
tion drug abuse––particularly of stimulants and opioid pain medications––
has seen a continual rise through the 1990s, and since 2002 has been at 
unacceptably high levels among persons age 12 or older.
5 
†  The terms “prescription drug abuse” and “nonmedical use” are used interchangeably in this document and are based on the definitions 
used by most national surveys measuring nonmedical use (i.e., the intentional use of an approved medication without a prescription, 
in a manner other than how it was prescribed, for purposes other than prescribed, or for the experience or feeling the medication can 
produce). Misuse refers to unintentional use of an approved medication in a manner other than how it was prescribed.
Figure I-1
8 of the top 13 drugs most commonly abused by high 
school seniors are prescription or over-the-counter
Past-Year Drug Abuse Among 12th-Graders, 2009
Source: University of Michigan, 2008 Monitoring the Future Survey
Nature and Scope 
of the Problem
In 2008, approximately 
6 million Americans 
reported current (in the 
past month) nonmedical 
use
† of prescription 
drugs—more than the 
number abusing cocaine, 
heroin, hallucinogens, 
and inhalants combined.
6 
According to the 
Monitoring the Future 
(MTF) survey supported 
by NIDA, 8 of the top 13 
drugs most commonly 
abused by high school 
seniors are either 
prescribed or purchased 
over the counter (see Figure I–1). 
While the MTF surveys students in the 
8th, 10th, and 12th grades, other survey 
research shows that young adults ages 
18–25 are by far the greatest users 
overall. This age group also shows the 
biggest increases, compared to others, 
in past-month, past-year, and lifetime 
non-medical use between 2002 and 2008 
(National Survey on Drug Use and Health 
[NSDUH], 2009). Even though not prescribed 
for them, many are using prescription drugs 
for their intended purposes, such as to 

--- PAGE 12 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
8
relieve pain in the case of prescription opioids, 
or to enhance alertness in the case of attention-
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) medications. 
A common perception is that because these are 
legitimate pharmaceuticals that emanate from a 
controlled system, they are less harmful than illicit 
drugs. This belief is false, as evidenced by rising 
numbers of people overdosing on or becoming 
addicted to prescription drugs. Whether the intent is 
to relieve pain, stay alert for a test, or get high, any 
use without a physician’s evaluation or monitoring 
can pose potentially grave health risks.  
At the other end of the age spectrum is the 
swelling population of older people who are 
frequently prescribed psychotherapeutic drugs and 
who may be especially vulnerable to the health 
consequences of their abuse or misuse. This is 
especially true if other medications or underlying 
health conditions are involved. Thus, prescription 
drug abuse and misuse affects populations of 
all ages and is further complicated by differing 
motivations and consequences for each.  
Different Approach Needed From That 
for Other Licit or Illicit Drugs
Because they can greatly benefit health as well 
as pose risks, prescription drugs present several 
challenges on how best to guard against their 
abuse.    
Some patients, such as those with chronic pain, 
may require prescription painkillers to effectively 
alleviate their suffering. But for these patients and 
their physicians, the issues can quickly become 
complex and difficult to manage. For example, 
physicians may need to decide whether presenting 
symptoms indicate a need to increase the dose of 
an opioid analgesic to adequately manage pain, or 
signal a potential drug abuse problem. Moreover, 
predicting who is at greatest risk for addiction is a 
difficult and increasingly relevant problem, one that 
is particularly urgent for war veterans returning from 
Iraq and Afghanistan who sustain serious injuries. 
Thus, NIDA continues to diligently support research 
in this area, including pursuing pain medications 
that have little or no addiction liability.
Another challenge involves crafting prevention 
messages to effectively combat the abuse of 
prescription drugs without alarming patients who 
need them. Because physicians are usually the 
prescribers of these medications, involving them in 
our efforts to curb prescription drug abuse is critical. 
Dramatic increases in the number of prescriptions 
written, greater social acceptance of using medica-
tions, and aggressive marketing by pharmaceutical 
companies have likely contributed to the current 
broad “environmental availability” of prescription 
drugs (see Figure I–2). This notion is consist-
ent with 2008 NSDUH survey data wherein most 
people report obtaining prescription drugs from 
friends and family members for whom they were 
prescribed. Thus, physicians need to be cognizant 
of the various risks and serve as the front-line re-
sponders when a problem is suspected, particularly 
if a patient may be developing abuse or addiction 
problems. NIDA continues to engage physicians 
and physicians-in-training to raise their awareness.
We are bolstering efforts to test and evaluate 
treatments for addiction to prescription drugs, 
tailoring interventions according to type of 
medication and reason for its abuse. These 
variables are often biased by age and gender. 
To stay on top of who is us

--- PAGE 13 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
9
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
Figure I-2
Projected Number of Prescriptions for Stimulants* Dispensed by  
U.S. Retail Pharmacies, 1991-2009
*excludes modafinil and atomoxetine products
Dramatic increases in stimulant and opioid prescriptions
Source: SDI’s Vector One®: National 
Total Number of Prescriptions for Hydrocodone and Oxycodone  
Products Dispensed by U.S. Retail Pharmacies, 1991-2009

--- PAGE 14 matched=['Strategic Goal', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
10
I. Prevention
Strategic Goal
To prevent the initiation of drug use and the escalation to addiction in 
those who have already initiated use.
Objectives
1. To identify the characteristics and patterns of drug abuse.
2. To understand how genes, environment, and development influence 
the various risk and protective factors for drug abuse. 
3. To improve and expand our understanding of basic neurobiology as 
it relates to the brain circuitry underlying drug abuse and addiction.
4. To apply this knowledge toward the development of more effective 
strategies to prevent people from ever taking drugs and from 
progressing to addiction if they do.
Introduction: The Value of Research-Based  
Prevention Approaches
The basic and clinical research sponsored by NIDA for more than 30 years 
has led to a vast and growing body of knowledge that informs our strategic 
directions for the future. And while multiple challenges remain, NIDA continues 
to capitalize on opportunities to meet our short- and long-term goals. These are, 
respectively, to prevent those who are abusing drugs from intensifying their 
abuse and becoming addicted, and to develop and deploy the best strategies to 
prevent drug use. 
This expanding body of knowledge is leading to evidence-based prevention 
strategies that build upon solid epidemiological, genetic, and neuroscience 
research. Our prevention portfolio continues to examine the impact of both 
micro- (e.g., family, peers) and macro- (e.g., poverty, stigma) environments, 
using a data-driven approach to prevent drug abuse and addiction in all 
populations.  
Although NIDA recognizes that addiction only affects a subset of those 
exposed, any illicit or inappropriate drug exposure can place an individual 
at risk for serious health consequences. Even a one-time drug experience 

--- PAGE 15 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
11
could lead to accidents (e.g., drugged 
driving) or disease (e.g., HIV/AIDS) 
stemming from drug intoxication. 
Because experimentation is a common 
motivation for adolescents to use drugs, 
our prevention messages must be aimed 
at keeping young people from trying 
drugs in the first place.  
Indeed, the adolescent population 
is of particular interest for NIDA 
because drug abuse typically begins 
during this period of heightened risk-
taking (see Figure 1). By supporting 
epidemiological studies, such as the 
MTF survey, we are able to identify 
emerging trends among adolescents and 
guide responsive national prevention 
efforts. For example, MTF revealed that 
in 2008, prescription medications along 
with over-the-counter drugs (cough 
medicine), accounted for 8 of the top 13 
drug abuse categories reported by 12th-
graders
7 (see “Focus on Prescription 
Drugs”).  
NIDA is vigorously pursuing research 
on the effects of abusable substances 
and how multiple factors––genes, the 
environment, developmental variables, 
and their interactions––influence 
vulnerability to and protection 
against addiction. The impact of drug 
abuse varies throughout the lifespan. 
NIDA therefore supports research 
that spans from prenatal exposure to 
older adulthood to uncover how life 
transitions influence the likelihood and 
trajectory of drug abuse and addiction. 
Future studies will examine how 
developmental shifts interact with genes 
and the environment to influence disease 
vulnerability and progression.  
Adding to this understanding is our growing knowledge of 
the multiple brain circuits associated with drug abuse and 
addiction, such as those implicated in reward, inhibitory control, 
emotional states, learning and memory
, and interoception 
(sensitivity to stimuli originating inside the body). In addition, 
basic research on brain development is illuminating how age 
affects the response to drugs, as well as addiction propensity and 
progression. With the powerful tools of modern neuroimaging, 
we can “see” how various brain mechanisms interact with drugs 
of abuse to influence decisionmaking (e.g., willingness to take 
risks). We can do this in real time, throughout development, and 
as people engage socially.  
Finally, NIDA is moving aggressively to tap into the power of 
imaging research in order to develop more effective prevention 
interventions. We know that specific target audiences––
adolescents, young adults, pregnant women, and older adults––
require tailored prevention approaches to more effectively 
reduce their risks and enhance the value of protective factors.  
Source: National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions, 2003
Individuals who initiate drug use early are more  
likely to develop subsequent dependence.
Figure 1


--- PAGE 16 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
12
Sidebar 1
Whether or not the exposure to drugs of 
abuse will lead to addiction is a function 
of the interaction between multiple 
domains, including genetic background, a 
person’s response to a drug, and his or her 
environment and developmental stage.
Strategic Approaches to  
Prevention Research
The following section is organized according to four 
guiding questions to describe NIDA’s approach of using 
basic, clinical, and health services research to improve 
our prevention efforts. 
1. How can NIDA research inform the focus of 
prevention?
NIDA continues to identify areas of particular concern 
and to spot trends early through our epidemiological 
work in the field. We monitor national and regional 
substance abuse trends through our nationwide 
Community Epidemiology Work Group (CEWG), the 
MTF survey, and other sources. These mechanisms help 
us identify the who, what, where, and when 
of drug abuse trends as well as associated 
attitudes and consequences.  
We also encourage research that capitalizes 
on other databases available through our 
sister Institutes and Federal agency partners, 
such as the National Epidemiologic Survey 
on Alcohol and Related Conditions, 
sponsored by the National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), 
and the National Survey of Parents and 
Youth, sponsored by the White House Office 
of National Drug Control Policy. In addition, 
we support a number of longitudinal studies 
that gather information on children’s 
cognitive and emotional development, as 
well as their vulnerability to addiction later 
in life if they have been exposed to drugs.
To continue to make the most of these 
rich data sources and to improve upon 
them, NIDA is encouraging researchers to 
include genetics in epidemiological studies, 
whenever relevant, to try to zero in on 
gene-environment interactions at different 
developmental stages. This potential treasure 
trove of genetic information, combined with 
brain imaging data, is likely to reveal even 
more about the trajectory of addiction and 
the contribution of social–environmental 
factors. This, in turn, will lead to 
increasingly customized interventions for 
those at risk.
2. Why do some people become addicted 
while others do not?
Our research has already identified many 
factors that can either enhance or mitigate an 
underlying propensity to initiate or continue 
drug use. Exposure to drugs is, of course, 
an environmental risk factor—along with 
socioeconomic status, quality of parenting, 
and peer group influence, to name a few. 
Advances in genetics are allowing us to 
identify biological factors, such as genetic 

--- PAGE 17 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
13
polymorphisms (normal genetic variations) 
that confer increased vulnerability or 
protection. Epigenetics research––the study 
of long-term changes in gene function that 
result from environmental impacts––will 
lead to discoveries about the dynamic 
interactions of genes with environment, 
along with developmental factors (see 
Sidebar 1). We know that addiction is a 
multifactorial, complex, and chronic disease 
of the brain so a better understanding 
of the many contributors to drug abuse 
and addiction, and the different ways 
they operate at the individual, group, and 
community levels, is critical to designing 
more effective prevention messages.
The influence of biological factors  
on a person’s addiction risk
Numerous biological factors confer 
risk of or protection against drug abuse 
and addiction. These include genetics, 
developmental stage, gender, comorbid 
diseases, and pharmacological response 
or sensitivity to a drug’s effects. As 
particular biological factors emerge from 
epidemiological and clinical studies, they 
can be put to the test in animal models (and 
possibly even in vitro) to help validate, 
trace, and explore their mechanisms for 
conveying addiction risk.
The use of animal models allows the 
manipulation of genetic, environmental, 
and developmental conditions to investigate 
related changes in the brain and behavior. 
NIDA researchers have developed relevant 
models in different species that help reveal 
various behavioral components of addiction. 
For example, these models can help tease 
apart susceptibility to drug taking, the role 
of stress and social factors in triggering 
drug-taking behaviors, and the transition 
from controlled intake to compulsive drug 
self-administration.  
Why genes matter
A
 person’s genetic makeup plays an important role in his 
or her addiction vulnerability and, possibly, in the decision 
to take drugs in the first place. Research shows that 
approximately 50 percent of the predisposition to addiction 
can be attributed to genetics. However, this influence is 
not a simple one. Like many complex diseases, addiction 
is likely to display a multifactorial pattern of inheritance—
which means that many genes contribute, each having 
a relatively small effect—influenced by environmental 
factors. A better understanding of these genetic influences 
is critical to our prevention efforts. Indeed, ongoing 
developments in the field of high-throughput genomic 
screens herald a much faster means of identifying 
specific gene variants that can contribute to (or guard 
against) addiction. The resulting knowledge could then 
be leveraged preventively to identify people at risk, well 
before a substance use disorder emerges.
In addition to the genetic vulnerabilities one is born 
with, gene function or gene expression is also influenced 
by environmental events. These in turn can alter brain 
function and behavior, and ultimately addiction risk or 
resilience. Epigenetic changes can be triggered, not just 
by drug exposure, but also by factors such as maternal 
behavior, aggression, and stress. Understanding the 
causes and effects of epigenetic changes will engender 
interventions to counter, prevent, or capitalize on them. 
How a person’s environment affects his or her  
risk of drug abuse or addiction
Working in concert with biological risk and protective 
factors are those that stem from our environment as 
we progress from f

--- PAGE 18 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
14
Sidebar 2
Environmental Factors Can 
Increase Drug Abuse Risk
Research demonstrates a relationship 
between illicit drug use and adverse 
childhood experiences (ACEs). A 
retrospective study cohort of 8,603 adults 
who attended a primary care clinic in 
California completed a survey about 
childhood abuse, neglect, and household 
dysfunction; illicit drug use; and other health-
related issues. Each ACE reported increased 
the likelihood for early drug use (by age 14) 
two- to fourfold and raised the risk of later 
addiction; people with 5 or more  ACEs were 
7–10 times more likely to report illicit drug 
use problems than those with none.   
Why it’s important: Research is needed 
to understand and evaluate the impact of 
environment and experience on the initiation 
of drug use and subsequent problems at 
any age. Progress in reducing drug use will 
demand attention to various types of stressful 
experiences, such as those identified in this 
study.
Source: Dube et al., 2003 – J Pediatr 111:564–572 
Social neuroscience. The initial decision to 
use drugs is often made in group situations, 
yet little is known about how social dynamics 
influence the basic cognitive and motivational 
processes that go into that decision and 
others involving risky behaviors. Social 
neuroscience seeks to explain social behavior 
in terms of its underlying neurobiological 
mechanisms (genetic, epigenetic, hormonal, 
biochemical, physiological). This discipline 
is being increasingly applied to understand 
a range of behaviors and experiences, 
including aggression, affiliation, attitudes, 
social decisionmaking, moral judgment, 
sexuality, communication, and others. NIDA 
is encouraging basic and clinical research 
that applies a social neuroscience perspective 
to drug abuse and decisionmaking over the 
course of a person’s lifespan.
Stress and trauma. Particularly if 
experienced early in life, stress and trauma 
can alter the brain and the response to stress 
throughout life. In humans, subsequent social 
stressors such as economic adversity, isolation, 
and parental abuse and neglect are known 
to influence age of first drug use, level and 
duration of use, and psychiatric comorbidities. 
The reasons are complex, but many people 
who have experienced trauma may turn to 
alcohol or other drugs to help themselves feel 
better. Often, a vicious cycle ensues in which 
abusing drugs to self-medicate engenders 
additional stress and leads to repeated 
substance abuse.  
NIDA is seeking to better understand 
how these variables influence drug abuse 
vulnerability (see Sidebar 2) and how they 
work in concert with a person’s larger 
environment. Studies continue to reveal 
that the interplay of biological and social 
influences affects individual choices and 
decisions about drugs. To learn more about 
this interplay, NIDA supports research to 
develop a comprehensive classification of 

--- PAGE 19 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
15
social and built environments (including 
family, peers, school, neighborhood, 
community, and culture). 
Neurobiological underpinnings. Research 
is needed to unravel how environmental 
factors like social stress induce brain changes 
that interact with drugs of abuse and alter 
behavior. We also need research to learn how 
to identify ways to counter or minimize stress 
effects. Animal research has begun to reveal 
mechanisms by which environmental variables 
can positively and negatively affect drug abuse 
risk. Further, brain imaging technologies 
are increasingly being used as part of drug 
abuse and addiction research in both animals 
and humans to illuminate how the brain is 
affected by stress and social influences (e.g., 
peer pressure) within the context of drug 
abuse or decisionmaking (see Sidebar 3). A 
better understanding of how social and other 
environmental factors influence behavior and 
how they might be reversed is important for 
prevention, particularly in adolescents.
Why young people are at special risk
The trajectory of drug use, abuse, and 
addiction typically begins in adolescence but 
sometimes even earlier. The greater risk of 
young people becoming addicted involves 
two major components. First, children and 
adolescents are naturally inclined, and much 
more likely than adults, to engage in risky 
behaviors, which may include experimenting 
with drugs of abuse. Current evidence––
derived mainly from human brain imaging 
studies––suggests that this phenomenon stems 
from still-developing brain regions involved 
in judgment, decisionmaking, and emotional 
control, which do not fully mature until early 
adulthood (see Sidebar 4). Second, because 
the young developing brain is constantly 
changing—physically and functionally—the 
effects of psychoactive drugs may be more 
pronounced and enduring if drug use starts 
Sidebar 3
Study Sheds Light on the 
Underlying Connections Between 
Social Stress and Drug Abuse 
Behaviors
In this study, monkeys that were transferred 
from isolation to group living and became 
dominant in the new social structure un-
derwent biological changes that gave them 
stronger 
dopamine 
signaling and 
less interest 
in cocaine 
compared 
to animals 
that became 
submissive. 
These find-
ings demon-
strate that 
alterations 
in an organ-
ism’s social 
environment 
can produce 
profound 
biological 
changes that 
have impor-
tant behav-
ioral consequences, includ-
ing vulnerability to cocaine’s 
rewarding effects.
Why it’s important: The 
emerging field of social neu-
roscience will examine how 
neurobiology and the social 
environment interact in abuse 
and addiction processes to  in-
fluence initiation, maintenance, 
treatment, and relapse.
Source: Morgan et al., 2002 – Nat Neurosci 5:169 

--- PAGE 20 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
16
Sidebar 4
Differential Rates of Brain 
Maturation May Account for 
Teenagers’ Risk-Taking Proclivity
This study reported that the nucleus 
accumbens, a part of the brain’s reward 
circuitry, matured faster than the orbital 
frontal cortex, which is involved in behavioral 
inhibition and control. This pattern of 
brain development was associated with a 
different valuing of rewards by adolescents 
as compared with adults and children, 
suggesting that the relative immaturity of the 
orbital frontal cortex in adolescents might 
underlie their propensity toward risk-taking 
behavior. 
 
nucleus 
accumbens
orbital frontal 
cortex
Rate of maturation
Source: Galvan et al., 2006 – J Neurosci 26:6885 
Why it’s important:
 These findings 
suggest that maturing subcortical systems 
become disproportionately activated (relative 
to later maturing top-down control systems), 
biasing the adolescent’s action toward 
immediate gratification over long-term gains.
early. Although this question is difficult to 
investigate in humans, animal studies have 
provided considerable evidence supporting this 
hypothesis. NIDA continues to encourage both 
basic and clinical research in this area. 
Even the very earliest exposure (i.e., in 
utero) can affect a variety of cognitive 
and mental health outcomes later in life. 
Abilities related to problemsolving, memory, 
learning, language, and reasoning are all 
vulnerable, as is a person’s risk for addiction. 
For example, prenatal exposure to nicotine 
was recently shown to influence the risk 
for nicotine addiction 30 years later.
8 This 
outcome could reflect nicotine’s ability to 
influence the expression of genes affecting 
fundamental processes in the developing 
brain. NIDA-supported longitudinal studies 
of prenatal exposure to several drugs of abuse 
help us understand the drug-specific impacts 
on developmental outcomes. These include 
outcomes affecting health, cognition, executive 
function, emotion, and attention regulation. 
How drug abuse risk varies across  
the life span
Significant developmental shifts occur 
throughout life and can shape drug abuse 
trajectories. Such transitions include post-
high school, a time of greater independence 
(associated with increased substance use and 
progression from abuse to addiction); adult 
role transitions, such as marriage, parenting, 
and full-time work (associated with decreased 
substance abuse); and older-age transitions, 
such as retirement and age-related medical 
issues (associated with increased potential for 
substance abuse-related medical consequences). 
Because the risk factors associated with a 
person’s biology and environment vary as a 
function of age, NIDA supports studies across 
all age groups, with a particular focus on life 
transitions.  

--- PAGE 21 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
17
It is clear that the course of drug addiction 
is related to both biological and cultural 
transitions. However, we need to further 
investigate how these developmental 
shifts interact with individual genetic and 
environmental backgrounds to influence the 
course of the disease. Doing so will lead to 
developmentally appropriate interventions.
The role of gender in drug abuse  
and addiction
Research has repeatedly shown that a broad 
spectrum of differences related to gender (e.g., 
social environment, physiological response to 
drugs, sexual dimorphisms in brain circuitry 
and hormones) can greatly influence not 
only drug abuse trajectories but also the 
characteristics of prevention (and treatment) 
programs that work best for either females or 
males.  
For example, research has identified the 
menstrual cycle (i.e., the estrous cycle in 
animals) as a determinant of drug action––
pharmacokinetic and behavioral––in both 
animals and humans. In animals, many 
behavioral effects of drugs are influenced 
by the estrous cycle and are eliminated by 
ovariectomy and subsequently restored by 
administering estradiol.
9 Suggestive evidence 
from both animal and human studies indicates 
that progesterone may also play a role in the 
subjective effects of drugs and contribute to 
gender differences in sensitivity to the drugs. 
These differences, observed in preclinical and 
clinical studies, highlight the complexities 
of just one influence on behavior—hormonal 
cycles in females––and emphasize the 
continuing need for studies targeting the ways 
in which gender influences drug abuse and 
addiction risk.
Sidebar 5
People With Particular Gene 
Variants May Suffer More Harmful 
Effects From Drugs of Abuse
A longitudinal study of people followed 
from birth to adulthood highlights the 
complex interactions between genetics, 
drug exposure, and age of use in the risk of 
developing a mental disorder. The catechol-
O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene, which 
comes in two forms, “Met” and “Val,” produces 
an enzyme that regulates dopamine, a 
brain chemical involved in schizophrenia.  
Individuals with one or two copies of the 
“Val” variant have a higher risk of developing 
symptoms of psychosis (e.g., hallucinations, 
delusions) or schizophrenic-type disorders if 
they used cannabis in adolescence; no effect 
was seen in those who did not carry this allele.
20
15
10
5
0
COMT genotype
No adolescent cannabis use
Adolescent cannabis use
Percent with schizophreniform
disorder at age 26
Met/Met
n= (151) (48)
Val/Met
(311) (91)
Val/Val
(148) (54)
Genetic variation in COMT influences
the harmful effects of abused drugs
Why it’s important:
 This study reveals 
a new approach for understanding how 
genetics, environment, and development 
interact to increase vulnerability to drug-
related consequences. 
Source: Caspi et al., 2005 – Biol Psychiatry 57:1117–1127

--- PAGE 22 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
18
Sidebar 6
Individuals vary in their response to drugs of abuse, 
in part, because of genetic influences on brain circuits 
that control emotional reactivity. The emerging field 
of neurogenomics is beginning to reveal the crucial 
pathways that connect genes to behaviors. 
Genetic research has shown that functional variants 
in the enzymes catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) 
and monoamine oxidase (MAO); and in the serotonin 
transporter (SERT) can affect the processing of 
emotional stimuli, which may also be influenced by 
other developmental and environmental factors.   
COMT. This enzyme degrades the catecholamine neurotransmitters dopamine, 
epinephrine, and norepinephrine. A less active variant of the gene for COMT 
has been associated with improved working memory, executive functioning, and 
attentional control, but also with a higher risk of anxiety-related behaviors. 
MAO. This enzyme degrades the monoamines serotonin and dopamine. Several 
genetic variations have been described that affect the levels of the MAO enzyme, 
particularly during brain development, that contribute to individual differences in 
aggressiveness.
SERT. This protein on the surface of some neurons plays a role in turning off 
the response to serotonin. Variations in a gene that regulates SERT expression 
affect the processing of aversive stimuli in the amygdala, the emotion center of the 
brain. Carriers of a short variant show stronger amygdala reactivity to stimuli and to 
particular contexts that are relatively uncertain and perhaps more stressful. This may 
put them at increased risk for developing anxiety disorders. 
Why it’s important: Vulnerability to addiction and other mental disorders likely 
resides in brain circuits regulating such functions as executive control and emotional 
reactivity.  Identification of the genetic factors that influence these functions will 
enhance our ability to identify those most at risk, allowing us to more effectively 
target our prevention efforts. 
Sources: Heinz et al., 2006 – Rev Neurosci 17(3):359–367; Volavka et al., 2004 – Ann NY Acad Sci 1036:393–398; 
Heinz et al., 2007 – Biol Psychiatry 61(8):1011–1014

--- PAGE 23 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'vision'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
19
The relationship between drug abuse  
and other mental illnesses
Many people who have a substance abuse 
disorder also have some other psychiatric 
disorder, and vice versa. For example, close 
to 90 percent of people with schizophre-
nia smoke,
10,11 for reasons that are not fully 
understood. Other studies show that exposure 
to certain drugs may increase risk for mental 
illness in vulnerable individuals (see Sidebar 5 
on page 17). Thus, a continuing NIDA priority 
is to unravel the intimate connections between 
drug abuse and addiction and other mental 
disorders. Good prevention hinges on a better 
understanding of whether these disorders have 
a shared origin, and of when early drug use 
increases the risk for mental illness––or vice 
versa.  
Because comorbidity intersects with the 
missions of other National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) constituents (e.g., National Institute of 
Mental Health), NIDA continues to work with 
our colleagues to encourage research on the 
epidemiology, genetics, and neurobiological 
bases of comorbidities. 
3. Which parts of the brain are involved in 
drug abuse?
Research shows that the brain circuits 
affected by drugs of abuse are mainly 
those involved in reward, decisionmaking, 
emotional reactivity (Sidebar 6), motivation, 
and cognitive inhibition. Drugs of abuse tend 
to activate reward and motivational circuits 
more effectively than natural rewards, leaving 
behind robust memories of their effects. The 
interactions among the densely interconnected 
circuits mentioned above determine the 
final course of action for an individual. For 
example, if the reward, motivation, and 
memory circuits overcome the inhibitory 
control circuit, a person may compulsively 
seek the rewarding stimulus, which could be 
drugs of abuse. Again, some of these circuits 
are not fully mature until early adulthood, 
making them potentially more vulnerable to 
disruption by exposure to drugs.  
Sidebar 7
Research has revealed a number of basic 
principles that underlie effective drug 
prevention programs for youth. These are 
highlighted in NIDA’s Preventing Drug 
Use among Children and Adolescents, 
a research-based guide for multiple 
audiences, including parents, educators, 
and community leaders.
Our vision is broad and applies the full power of basic 
and clinical research, neuropsychological testing, and 
functional neuroimaging to help us understand not just 
one molecule or one pathway at a time, but the addiction 
circuitry as an integral part of a wider network. In this 
network, pathways influence one another in highly 
complex ways.
4. How are research results used to improve practice?
A general set of science-based prevention principles 
has emerged from biological, psychological, and social 
science discoveries. This knowledge has been used to 
develop prevention programs with proven efficacy and 
effectiveness (see Sidebar 7). Similarly, to capitalize 
on new research findings, NIDA sponsors a Prevention 

--- PAGE 24 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
20
Sidebar 8
Schools Adopt 
Smarter Strategies 
To Get the Message 
Across
Similar to ATLAS (Athletes 
Training and Learning 
to Avoid Steroids) for 
male athletes, ATHENA 
(Athletes Targeting Healthy 
Exercise and Nutrition Alternatives) for 
female athletes has the goal of increasing 
healthy behavioral choices and preventing 
drug abuse. Program activities, delivered 
by coaches during a sports team’s usual 
practice schedule, focus on the benefits 
of healthy sports nutrition and effective 
exercise training, as well as the dangers 
associated with drug abuse and other 
unhealthy behaviors. This intervention 
correlated with reduced use of drugs— 
including abuse of diet pills, stimulants, 
and steroids—as well as with other 
positive changes, such as healthier eating 
behaviors.
 
Why it’s important: Innovative 
prevention programs incorporated into the 
school setting present an effective way 
to reach young people, particularly when 
delivered by role models whom young 
people naturally admire and respect.
Source: Elliot et al., 2004 – Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 158:1043
Network of research centers nationwide. This network 
integrates research from various disciplines to stimulate 
its translation and to inform basic science hypotheses 
that may help develop new approaches or refine existing 
programs. 
NIDA is also exploring new areas in prevention science, 
such as the effects of physical activity on substance 
abuse. Assessing aggregated neighborhood risk factors 
can inform strategies for more effective programs that 
yield lasting results. These would synthesize 
family, school, and community efforts. 
Indeed, emerging research demonstrates 
that prevention interventions can have 
long-term and even cross-over effects (e.g., 
on driving behaviors and psychological 
functioning),
12,13 and can alter life 
trajectories.   
Although NIDA-supported research has 
identified effective prevention programs, 
they are not being widely implemented. 
Therefore, we are looking to expand 
research efforts on the factors that influence 
the adoption and long-term sustainability 
of evidence-based prevention initiatives in 
schools and other settings.
How science can help refine prevention 
messages
NIDA recognizes that, along with addressing 
risk and protective factors, effective 
messages also depend on incorporating 
imaginative communication strategies aimed 
at different target audiences. Such a tailored 
approach is reflected in NIDA’s successful 
school-based prevention programs for male 
and female athletes (see Sidebar 8).  
Changing times require innovative research-
based communication tools to help us 
decode and incorporate the preferences 
of young people, so that our prevention 
messages are salient. Closer attention to 
prevention science is increasingly critical in 
a media environment where the landscape is 
constantly changing. For example, research 
on health-related e-tools, social networking 
sites, virtual worlds, and other new media is 
crucial. Trends suggest that the Internet may 
be an inexpensive and effective means of 
delivering interventions with a wide reach.     
Our ultimate goal is to improve message 
effectiveness with the intended audience. 
The addition of new tools and methods of 

--- PAGE 25 matched=['Strategic Goal', 'Strategic Plan', 'Vision'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
21
analysis help refine our interventions 
and provide a means of testing how the 
brain reacts to prevention messages. 
Neuroimaging technology could be 
applied to reveal how people process 
media messages in anti-drug advertising. 
Though we are not yet ready to design a 
prevention strategy on the basis of how 
adolescents might view a message in 
comparison to adults, the fundamental 
research that will form the basis for 
scientifically rational design is now 
under way. Indeed, these studies may 
spark a new generation of effective, 
tailored, anti-drug messaging that 
integrates cultural and social influences.  
Our Vision for the Future 
of Prevention of Drug 
Abuse and Addiction 
We envision a future where new 
knowledge and leading-edge 
technologies produce selective, cost-
efficient, and effective prevention 
products and initiatives. Our prevention 
toolkit someday will allow us to develop 
messages that flow from a dramatically 
better understanding of the many 
complex and interdependent phenomena 
that characterize drug abuse and 
addiction. Improved prevention efforts 
will incorporate what we have learned 
about genetic contributions to addiction 
vulnerability, about the function of 
the human brain and developmental 
processes under normal conditions 
or after drug exposure, and about 
specific brain and behavioral responses 
associated with an individual’s age and 
social context. We are working toward 
a future in which early recognition of 
significant addiction risk is no different 
from early recognition of any other 
chronic disease, such as hypertension, 
diabetes, or asthma. 
II. Treatment
Strategic Goal
To develop successful treatments for drug 
abuse and addiction and improve treatment 
accessibility and implementation.
Objectives
1. To develop effective medications and 
behavioral interventions to treat drug abuse 
and addiction and to prevent relapse.
2. To develop treatments for drug abuse and 
addiction in association with comorbid 
conditions.
3. To develop the knowledge that leads to 
personalized or customized treatments.
4. To translate research-based treatments to 
the community.
Introduction: The Value of a Multipronged and 
Integrated Approach to Addiction Treatment 
Decades of research have led to today’s improved understanding of 
addiction as a chronic, relapsing brain disease caused by the complex 
interaction of genetic, social, environmental, and developmental 
factors. NIDA therefore recognizes the need for a whole systems 
approach to treating drug abuse and addiction. 
Drugs of abuse alter normal brain functioning in profound and long-
lasting ways so that the brain can become “reengineered” to seek 
the drug above all else. This behavior occurs because the addicted 
person is conditioned to need the drug and finds it difficult, if not 
impossible, to resist. This dysfunctional state makes the addicted 
individual vulnerable to relapse triggers, even absent of conscious 
awareness of them. 
NIDA supports multidisciplinary research addressing the multiple 
factors that can influence drug abuse and addiction trajectories. 
Research results inform treatment strategies to facilitate abstinence 
and prevent relapse. New findings continue to inspire development 

--- PAGE 26 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
22
of medications and behavioral interventions to 
counteract drug-induced alterations in the circuits 
responsible for motivational, cognitive, and emotional 
functions. Advances come from the continued 
application of approaches that tap into potential benefits 
of the following:
• Expanding the range of drugs or populations that 
can be targeted with addiction medications that have 
already been approved.  
• Developing medications for molecules and circuits 
affected by specific drugs, as well as for targets more 
generally affected by many drugs. 
• Developing research-based treatments that match an 
addicted person’s changing needs, attitudes, and 
motivations over time. 
• Developing medications to restore cognitive functions 
disrupted by addiction, which may have impeded the 
success of behavioral therapies. 
• Weakening the power of relapse triggers.
• Taking into account the influence of 
comorbid conditions (e.g., mental 
illness, chronic pain, HIV/HCV) 
and genetic makeup to achieve truly 
customized treatments. 
NIDA recognizes that despite major 
strides in treatment research, only limited 
improvements have occurred in nonresearch 
settings. A scientific approach must be 
brought to bear on understanding how to 
most effectively test and disseminate 
research-based treatments and how health 
services systems and settings influence 
treatment implementation. Ultimately, it is 
our goal to make research-based treatments 
user-friendly, cost-effective, and available 
to a broad range of practitioners and their 
patients.
Strategic Approaches to 
Treatment
NIDA supports research to develop 
treatments that address the multiple and 
specific needs of a person trying to recover 
from drug abuse and addiction. The 
addition of tools such as neuroimaging 
technologies and those designed to generate 
detailed genetic information may help us 
to individualize treatments and predict 
treatment response. This knowledge will 
lead to more targeted and cost-effective 
approaches for greater specificity.
For more information 
visit our Web site at: 
www.drugabuse.gov

--- PAGE 27 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
23
1. How can NIDA research help develop 
and enhance medications and 
behavioral therapies to reduce drug 
abuse and prevent relapse?
NIDA’s approach to medications 
development
NIDA supports a dual strategy: one that 
takes advantage of already-approved 
medications with putative addiction 
applications, and the other that develops 
new compounds to interact with novel 
targets for treating drug abuse and addiction 
and their health consequences. In both cases, 
NIDA encourages researchers to work with 
commercial companies. The advantages 
of testing already-approved medications 
include the availability of safety profile 
information, lower development costs, and 
shorter times for obtaining FDA approval.
On the other hand, the development of 
new compounds may be more responsive 
to breakthrough scientific discoveries. For 
instance, NIDA research has uncovered 
several components of the cannabinoid 
system, along with heterodimeric receptors 
(i.e., receptors that combine, or “dimerize,” 
to create targets with novel biological 
properties that could be harnessed to provide 
a broader array of medication options). 
This approach is already being exploited 
to develop medications for chronic pain 
that could circumvent the problematic side 
effects (e.g., tolerance and dependence) of 
many current medications (see Sidebar 9).
Sidebar 9
Pain Management: Alternative 
Approaches Promise Pain Relief 
Without Abuse Liability
 
Glia. Research reveals that glial cells 
(historically regarded as supporting 
players) play key roles in regulating pain 
signals. Through the secretion of a host of 
molecules, glial cells influence pain and 
inflammatory processes. Targeting glia and 
their soluble products may provide a novel 
and effective therapy for controlling clinical 
pain syndromes.
CB2. 
Activation of cannabinoid type 2 
(CB2) receptors inhibits acute, inflammatory, 
and neuropathic pain responses in animal 
models. Since these receptors are located 
largely outside the brain, selective CB2 
agonists are promising candidates for the 
treatment of acute and chronic pain without 
the psychoactive effects.  
Opioid receptor heterodimers.  
Opioid receptors exist as dimers––protein 
molecules composed of two linked 
subunits––whose variable makeup affects 
resulting pharmacology. Strategies are being 
developed to identify compounds that will 
specifically bind and activate different opioid 
receptor combinations. Such compounds 
could represent the next generation of 
pain relievers with decreased side effects, 
including reduced drug abuse liability.
Sources: Watkins LR et al., 2007 – Brain Behav Immun 21:131–146; 
Whiteside GT et al., 2007 – Curr Med Chem 14:917–936; Daniels et al., 
2005 – PNAS 102(52):19208–19213  

--- PAGE 28 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
24
Sidebar 10
Animal Models Are Crucial to 
Research on Drug Abuse and 
Addiction
Animal models have greatly contributed 
to our understanding of addiction’s 
underlying substrates, the abuse liability 
of novel compounds, the role of candidate 
vulnerability genes and stress in relapse, and 
the persistence of drug taking. They allow 
scientists to rigorously control and analyze 
biological and environmental factors related 
to drug abuse and test novel approaches to 
prevention and treatment.  The noteworthy 
development of buprenorphine as a treatment 
for opiate addiction began with studies 
using animal models, as is the case for most 
medications being tested in human clinical 
trials.  
Self-administration, or the voluntary intake 
of abusable substances by animals, is now 
among the most widely used paradigms 
by pharmaceutical companies around the 
world to evaluate the abuse liabilities of new 
medications. Because animals will self-
administer nearly all drugs of abuse and 
continue to take them when available, they 
allow us to study the chronic effects of drugs 
on their brains and behavior.
Source: Caine, et al. (ed), 1993 – Behavioural Neuroscience: A 
Practical Approach, Vol. 2 117–143
Regardless of the approach used, NIDA 
takes advantage of the combination of 
validated animal models and translational 
human laboratory studies to develop and test 
medications (see Sidebar 10).
How behavioral treatments help drug 
abusers
Behavioral therapies have already 
been successfully developed to help 
individuals with addictions engage in the 
treatment process, modify their attitudes 
and behaviors, and nurture those skills 
that are conducive to a healthy lifestyle. 
These treatments can also enhance the 
effectiveness of medications (and vice versa) 
and help people stay in treatment longer. 
Addiction to drugs such as cocaine and 
methamphetamine can disrupt cognitive 
functioning and interfere with treatment 
retention and efficacy. Therefore, NIDA is 
supporting research on medications such 
as Modafinil (which is currently FDA-
approved for treating narcolepsy) as an 
adjunct to behavioral therapy because of 
their proven cognitive-enhancing proper-
ties. Early results are promising for cocaine 
treatment, and research in methamphetamine 
abusers is under way.
14 
NIDA also plans to explore cutting-edge 
cybertechnologies for both developing new 
treatments and expanding treatment delivery. 
New technologies are opening the door to 
shared virtual worlds (environments, social 
networks, communities), digitally controlled 
environments, augmented realities, 
robotics, and brain computer interfaces, 
among many others. All these could have 
applications in drug abuse treatment. 
NIDA is already exploring the potential 
of computer-delivered interventions as a 
comparatively low-cost means of widely 
disseminating evidence-based approaches 
while ensuring treatment fidelity. Early 

--- PAGE 29 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
25
studies of cognitive-behavioral therapy 
and community reinforcement approaches 
support the feasibility and acceptability of 
this strategy.
15,16
What effective treatments are  
designed to do
Drug abuse disrupts the brain circuits 
involved in reward, memory/learning, and 
control over behavior. Memories linked to 
the drug experience, for example, can trigger 
powerful drug cravings that can “mute” 
other parts of a person’s life so that drug 
seeking and use become an all-consuming 
focus. Craving is therefore a major 
contributor to relapse, posing what seems 
an insurmountable challenge to an addicted 
person (see Sidebar 11). NIDA’s strategic 
approaches to treatment are thus being 
employed to (1) counter relapse triggers, (2) 
strengthen self-control, and (3) reinstate the 
reward value of natural reinforcers while 
decreasing that of drug stimuli.
Prevent Relapse. The most frequent 
triggers of relapse include stress, exposure to 
conditioned cues, and priming (re-exposure 
to drugs of abuse). Medications that block 
reinstatement of drug-taking behaviors in 
animals by these three triggers are now 
being tested in humans.
Both clinical reports and preclinical studies 
have documented the important role that 
stress plays in relapse. Medications or 
behavioral treatments that can interfere 
with or mitigate the response to stress may 
thus offer promise for relapse prevention. 
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) is 
known to be a key brain chemical involved 
in organizing the brain and body response to 
stress. Thus, medications that target CRF are 
of interest. Animal studies have shown that 
compounds that block CRF signals attenuate 
the reinstatement of drug taking following 
Sidebar 11
Brain Region Linked to Reduced 
Drug Craving
Despite being aware of negative 
consequences, many smokers have 
serious difficulty quitting, and those who 
quit experience urges to smoke and often 
relapse.  A recent study of patients who 
had suffered various brain injuries revealed 
a new role for the insula (shown in red) in 
regulating conscious urges, including drug 
craving.  Researchers at the University 
of Iowa monitored the quit histories of 
approximately 70 smokers and found that 
those with specific damage to the insula 
were much more likely to quit easily and 
immediately and to remain abstinent than 
those with damage to other brain areas. 
Why it’s important: This discovery could 
identify a new target to inhibit craving.
Source: Naqvi, N. et al., 2007 – Science 315:531
exposure to stressors. Since drug withdrawal syndromes 
and the often chaotic lifestyles of drug abusers are 
manifestly stressful states, strategies that improve coping 
mechanisms or reduce the stress response could help 
prevent stress-induced relapse.

--- PAGE 30 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
26
Sidebar 12
Compound Reduces Marijuana’s 
Intoxicating Effects and May Help 
Prevent Relapse From Drug Exposure 
(Priming) and Environmental Cues
Marijuana smokers 
given an experimental 
compound (SR141716, 
rimonabant) reported 
reduced highs (and smaller 
heart rate increases) 
compared with untreated 
smokers (see A). Because 
SR141716 partially blocks 
the intoxicating effects 
of marijuana’s active 
ingredient (THC), it may 
prove valuable in treating 
marijuana addiction and 
perhaps other addictions 
as well.  Indeed, in a rat 
model of relapse to drug seeking, SR141716 
dramatically reduced resumption of cocaine-
seeking triggered by two of the three most 
common relapse triggers: a priming dose of 
cocaine and conditioned cues associated with 
cocaine reward (see B). The compound did not 
reduce cocaine-seeking triggered by stress.
(A)
(B)
Why it’s important: 
The cannabinoid system 
is a new player in our understanding of the 
rewarding effects of drugs, and compounds 
that target this system may have application for 
not only marijuana treatment, but also for other 
drugs since they can block relapse triggers.
Sources: Huestis et al., 2001 – Arch Gen Psychiatry 58(4):322–328; 
De Vries et al., 2002 – Pharmacol Rev 54:1–42
Conditional cues  are stimuli (e.g., people, 
places, moods, things) that become 
associated with the drug experience 
and can serve as triggers to relapse. 
Conditioned cues can pose formidable 
obstacles to successful therapy for many 
individuals because they can elicit craving 
without conscious recognition of their 
influence. Medications designed to blunt 
conditioned responses or promote their 
extinction (an active process whereby 
previously learned associations are 
weakened) could enhance the efficacy of 
psychotherapeutic interventions. A proof-
of- concept for this approach has already 
been shown with D-cycloserine (DCS), a 
partial agonist of the NMDA (glutamate) 
receptor. DCS may facilitate extinction 
and promote new learning, and has been 
successfully used in conjunction with 
psychotherapy for treating acrophobia (the 
fear of heights).
17  Medications available 
for other indications are also being tested 
for their ability to reduce cue-induced 
drug cravings.
Priming, or drug exposure, is the response 
to a drug in a formerly addicted person 
that propels him or her to further drug 
use and, often, to relapse. Data show that 
people in treatment who “slip” are at 
higher risk of relapse or of returning to 
former levels of drug abuse.  
Research in this area has already produced 
positive results. Cannabinoid and opioid 
antagonists, for example, have been shown 
to block the priming response in animals 
and suppress their self-administration of 
drugs in a relapse model of drug seeking 
(see Sidebar 12).  
Another strategy being explored is to 
block priming attempts by harnessing 
the immune response. The rationale is to 
develop “vaccines” that induce the body 
to produce drug-specific antibodies. At 

--- PAGE 31 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
27
high enough concentration, these antibodies 
would sequester drug molecules while they 
are still in the bloodstream, preventing them 
from reaching the brain and exerting their 
psychoactive effects. Nicotine and cocaine 
vaccines have already been developed and 
are undergoing further testing in animals 
and humans. A methamphetamine vaccine 
is in development. NIDA has also requested 
proposals for a heroin vaccine, which could 
be particularly valuable in areas of the 
world where opioid agonist medications 
are not accepted. NIDA plans to continue 
supporting research on strategies designed to 
block the priming response.
Strengthening Self-Control. The decision-
making circuits of the human brain, which 
are not even fully developed until a per-
son’s mid-20s, govern our ability to control 
impulses. Drug abuse and addiction can 
severely disrupt these processes, contribut-
ing to the compulsive features of addiction. 
A complementary strategy supported by 
NIDA is to strengthen the function of brain 
regions involved with decisionmaking and 
inhibitory control (distributed throughout the 
frontal cortex).  
Noninvasive brain stimulation and 
“neurofeedback” may prove to be useful 
therapeutic tools in this context. Researchers 
are exploring the use of technologies 
such as repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (rTMS) and feedback training 
using real-time functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) (see Sidebar 
19 on page 33) to noninvasively influence 
brain activity in specific regions. Though 
not yet demonstrated for addiction, these 
techniques show promising results in 
managing depression and in influencing pain 
perception, respectively.
18 Further validating 
research could render these technologies 
powerful psychotherapeutic interventions for 
rescuing the circuits and behaviors impaired 
by addiction.  
Sidebar 13
Overexpression of Dopamine D2 
Receptors Reduces Alcohol Self-
Administration in Rats
  
Addiction is characterized 
by decreased sensitivity 
to natural rewards, likely 
related to diminished function 
in dopamine brain circuits.  
Human brain imaging studies 
have provided substantial 
evidence showing that 
individuals addicted to a variety 
of substances have low levels 
of dopamine type 2 receptors 
(DRD2) in the striatum (a part 
of the reward circuit).
In this experiment, researchers 
sought to determine whether 
increasing levels of DRD2 in 
the brain could reduce alcohol 
consumption in animals trained 
to self-administer the drug. 
Brain levels of DRD2 in rats 
were increased by injecting a 
virus that expresses high levels 
of DRD2 protein in a key area 
of the brain’s reward pathway 
(see A). This manipulation led 
to an overexpression of DRD2 
receptors that dissipated over 
time (see B) and a corre-
sponding decrease in alcohol 
consumption that resumed 
when the receptors returned to 
baseline (low) levels (see C).
Why it’s important: 
Although the use of viral 
vector–delivered genes is not 
practical for clinical use, these 
results provide a proof-of-
concept that enhancement 
of dopamine D2 receptors 
may be a useful approach 
for treating drug abuse. Medications and 
behavioral strategies to reinstate dopamine 
receptor function in the reward circuitry may be 
beneficial in treating addiction. 
Source: Thanos et al., 2001 – J Neurochem 78(5):1094–1103

--- PAGE 32 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
28
Sidebar 14
Co-occurrence of addiction and other 
mental disorders is common. Substance 
abuse sometimes begins as a way to 
alleviate symptoms of a mental illness. 
Further, substance abuse may increase 
the vulnerability to other mental illnesses.  
Also, some of the factors that contribute to 
substance abuse and other mental illnesses 
are the same. Stress is one example, and 
patients suffering from post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) have high rates of drug and 
alcohol abuse. Because of the projected 
increases in PTSD due to members of the 
military returning from service, NIDA will 
increase its research investment in this 
area and collaborate with the Department 
of Veterans Affairs, the Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration 
(SAMHSA), and multiple NIH Institutes—
NIMH, National Cancer Institute, NIAAA, 
and the National Heart, Lung and Blood 
Institute––in developing its research agenda.
Reinstating the Value of Natural Rewards. Drug abuse 
and addiction impair the reward system, diminishing the 
value of formerly rewarding stimuli in a person’s life. 
NIDA therefore seeks approaches to counter drugs’ effects 
on brain systems affecting reward and motivation—and 
help restore the value of natural rewards. 
Animal research has demonstrated the 
feasibility of modulating the dopamine 
reward system in ways that affect sensitivity 
to drug taking. For example, alcohol-
preferring rats induced to overexpress 
dopamine receptors in the nucleus 
accumbens (a part of the reward circuitry) 
decreased their alcohol consumption (see 
Sidebar 13 on page 27). Further, in studies 
of nonhuman primates, social factors have 
been shown to influence the function of 
the dopamine system and vulnerability to 
drug taking (see Sidebar 4 on page 16). 
These studies suggest a malleable reward 
system that may be capable of recovering 
from drug addiction. The goal would be to 
heighten dopamine system sensitivity in 
drug-addicted individuals so as to enhance 
the value of natural reinforcers (i.e., social 
interactions, eating good food, etc.).
How patients sustain recovery
There are many pathways to recovery. Some 
patients may require lengthy treatment 
protocols in residential therapeutic settings, 
while others may benefit from less intensive 
outpatient treatment. The goal is the same: to 
help patients develop the internal motivation 
and skills to abstain from drugs and regain 
their lives.
However, because of the chronic nature of 
addiction, continuing care (e.g., “booster” 
treatment sessions, recovery groups, and 
other social support systems) can be crucial 
to a person’s ability to sustain a drug-free 
lifestyle. A patient may require varying 
combinations of services and treatment 
components during the course of recovery. 
Along with counseling, psychotherapy, and 
medical services, patients may also benefit 
from family therapy, parenting instruction, 
vocational rehabilitation, and social and 
legal services. NIDA continues to support 

--- PAGE 33 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
29
research to better understand how such 
therapies work and how to implement them 
in community settings to engage and keep 
patients in treatment and prevent relapse.
2.  What if people have another mental 
disorder—how does that affect 
treatment for addiction?
Mental illness is highly comorbid with 
substance use disorders. In fact, as many 
as 6 in 10 people who have an illicit drug 
use disorder also suffer from other mental 
illnesses.
19 Having both can greatly increase 
the challenge of diagnosing and treating the 
disorders; and ignorance of or failure to treat 
one disorder can jeopardize the chances of a 
successful intervention for the other. Patients 
with co-occurring disorders often exhibit 
symptoms that are more persistent, severe, 
and refractory to treatment, compared with 
those with just one disorder. Health care 
providers and caregivers should therefore 
be aware that drug abuse and other mental 
illnesses often occur together, necessitating 
a comprehensive treatment approach (see 
Sidebar 14). Thus, NIDA supports research 
aimed at adapting and integrating treatments 
that tackle these overlapping conditions, 
which affect some of the same circuits in the 
brain.  
For some mental disorders, pharmaco-
therapies are already available to alleviate 
symptoms. Medications such as stimulants, 
antidepressants, mood stabilizers, and neu-
roleptics may be critical to treatment success 
for ADHD, depression, anxiety disorders, 
bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. How 
these medications are affected by, or alter 
the effects of, abused substances is not well 
understood. Some medications may even 
prove efficacious for treating both drug ad-
diction and other mental illnesses. Effective 
Sidebar 15
Groundbreaking Genetics Tools 
Will Lead to More Personalized 
Prevention and Treatment 
Approaches for Drug Abuse and 
Addiction
New knowledge derived from large, 
comprehensive genetic databases, com-
bined with new genetics technology, will 
allow researchers to study thousands of 
addiction-relevant gene variants at once.  
Potential applications of this knowledge 
include studies to understand how genetic 
differences contribute to brain develop-
ment and to differential brain responses 
to drugs of abuse. This knowledge could 
also be applied to prospective epidemio-
logical studies to understand how genes 
and environment interact throughout the 
lifespan to modulate addiction risk. Clini-
cal trials could use genetic information to 
tailor treatments based on a patient’s ge-
netic makeup (i.e., to enhance treatment 
effectiveness and minimize, or even pre-
vent, adverse effects).  Finally, genetics 
could inform studies aimed at advancing 
the understanding of disease vulnerability 
in relation to psychiatric comorbidity (i.e., 
depression, ADHD, schizophrenia).

--- PAGE 34 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
30
Sidebar 16
Gene Cluster Linked to Nicotine 
Dependence and Associated 
Diseases
A recent study provides an example of how 
genome-wide analyses are being used to 
identify novel candidate mechanisms of 
disease vulnerability and therapeutic targets. 
Here, investigators interrogated the genomes 
of close to 11,000 Icelandic smokers with 
a platform displaying over 306,000 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)––or 
single-base changes in a person’s DNA 
(millions of which have been catalogued 
by the Human Genome Project). The study 
identified a cluster of three nicotinic receptor 
subunit genes (α3, α5, and β4) linked to 
smoking quantity, nicotine dependence, and 
the 
risk of two smoking-related diseases: lung 
cancer and peripheral arterial disease.
 
Why it’s important: Identification of 
this genetic cluster converges with growing 
evidence from prior studies of its linkage 
to nicotine dependence and to serious 
health consequences. This new information 
reveals a novel target for the development of 
medications to treat tobacco addiction and 
related diseases.    
Source: Thorgeirsson et al., 2008  –  Nature 452:638–642
medications also exist for opioid, alcohol, 
and nicotine addictions. However, their use 
has not been well studied in comorbid popu-
lations or among those taking other psycho-
active medications. Various forms of be-
havioral treatment, alone or in combination 
with medications, can be the cornerstone 
to achieving successful outcomes for both 
substance abuse and other mental disorders. 
Their use in comorbid populations should 
also be evaluated.
  
3. How will treatments be tailored for 
optimal effectiveness?
NIDA’s research program is poised to 
play an important role in developing 
treatments that can take individual and 
group vulnerabilities into account. Doing so 
will help us derive more personalized and, 
thus, more effective treatments for people 
with drug use disorders. To this end, NIDA 
is capitalizing on advances in genetics, 
epigenetics, and brain imaging technology, 
and on research revealing the influence of 
environmental and developmental factors.  
Genetic expression profiles are affected 
by substance abuse and can change 
throughout development. To investigate, 
NIDA researchers are constructing a 
comprehensive database of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) relevant to addiction 
(http://zork.wustl.edu/nida/neurosnp.html) 
(see Sidebar 15 on page 29). SNPs are 
variations in DNA sequence that occur when 
a single nucleotide in the genome sequence 
is altered. By assembling all genes identified 
as biologically relevant to addiction, NIDA 
is helping to identify potential novel targets 
for the development of medications (see 
Sidebar 16). We are also expanding the 
knowledge base so that next-generation 
pharmaceuticals can use information about 
a person’s genetic makeup to predict how 

--- PAGE 35 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
31
he or she will respond to a therapeutic 
medication. Promising findings have 
already emerged relative to the treatment 
of nicotine and alcohol addictions. 
NIDA is encouraging research that 
develops and evaluates new platforms 
for potential use in screening for the 
telltale signatures of chronic drug abuse 
in blood cells, serum, or saliva. Looking 
at messenger RNA (mRNA), epigenetic 
marks, and protein expression profiles 
(proteomics) could dramatically enhance 
our ability to diagnose chronic drug 
exposure in primary care and other 
settings.
4. How will drug abuse treatment reach 
the people who need it?
NIDA’s clinical trials are the foundation 
for testing and evaluating promising 
drug abuse and addiction treatments. We 
support research trials for all phases of 
medications and behavioral treatment 
development. We also encourage 
collaboration with industry to optimize 
costs and resource allocation and to more 
efficiently develop or adapt treatments. 
As effective treatments emerge, NIDA 
tests them in real-world settings. These 
efforts are exemplified by our National 
Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials 
Network (CTN) and our collaborative 
Criminal Justice Drug Abuse Treatment 
Studies (CJ-DATS) (see Sidebar 18 on 
page 32). The CTN studies, for example, 
continue to reveal information for 
optimizing the treatment of comorbid 
conditions and the translation of new 
medications to community settings. 
They also assess novel interventions to 
reduce HIV risk among drug-abusing 
populations. CJ-DATS broadens the 
testing of proven drug abuse treatments 
Sidebar 17
Methadone 
Maintenance 
 
Works for Prisoners 
More than 200 heroin-
dependent inmates in 
Baltimore were randomly 
assigned to one of three 
groups: (1) educational 
counseling only; (2) 
counseling in prison with 
the opportunity to enroll in 
methadone maintenance 
treatment upon release; 
and (3) counseling and 
methadone maintenance 
during incarceration, 
with transfer to 
community-based 
methadone maintenance after release. Six 
months after release, those who began 
methadone maintenance in prison were 
significantly more likely to enter and remain 
in community-based treatment, were less 
likely to test positive for illicit opioids, and 
had significantly fewer days of heroin use 
and criminal activity than participants who 
received counseling only.  
Why it’s important: Despite its 
demonstrated effectiveness in treating 
opioid abuse, methadone maintenance 
is rarely provided in correctional facilities. 
However, this study shows that methadone 
maintenance treatment begun prior to or 
upon release from prison is an inexpensive 
and effective intervention that may prevent 
the devastating cycle that can happen to 
formerly incarcerated drug abusers who go 
untreated—that is, a return to drug abuse 
upon re-entry to the community, further 
criminal activity, exposure to infectious 
diseases, and re-arrest and imprisonment.
Sources: Kinlock et al., 2007 – Drug Alcohol Depend 91(2–3): 220-227;  
Kinlock et al., 2008 – Crim Justice Behave 35(1): 34-47; Gordon et al., 
2008 – Addiction 103: 1333–1342 

--- PAGE 36 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
32
Sidebar 18
Science Reveals Treatments that 
Work for Drug Abuse 
and Addiction
Research has revealed a number of basic 
principles that underlie effective drug 
addiction treatment, as highlighted in NIDA’s 
treatment guides for the general population 
and for criminal justice offenders.
in criminal justice settings, including CJ settings with adolescents. 
It continues to solicit the greater involvement of public health and 
public safety institutions across all system levels. NIDA plans to 
support ongoing research on drug courts to learn how they work and 
how to advance their use, looking at the judge’s role in changing 
drug court participant behavior and outcomes, for example.  
All of these initiatives allow NIDA to exploit an open-channel 
communication approach with relevant stakeholders to collect 
information on how to generalize and further enhance treatments so 
they are more community/justice system-friendly.  
Overcoming barriers to more rapidly translate  
research findings  
NIDA’s overall mission is not just to develop knowledge about drug 
abuse but also to disseminate that knowledge into practical use. 
We engage in multiple activities aimed at closing the unacceptably 
long lag between the discovery of effective treatment interventions 
and their integration into community clinical practice.
20 Despite 
major strides in drug abuse treatment research, the adoption of 
science-based programs has been rather limited. This may relate to 
several unique characteristics that distinguish 
treatment for drug abuse from that for most 
other diseases, including: 
• service delivery outside of mainstream 
health care settings;
• overburdened treatment systems, often 
with low pay and high staff turnover rates;
• external (i.e., court-mandated) pressure on 
individuals seeking care;
• nonreimbursement for costs of care;
• reliance on public sources for program 
funding; and
• stigma attached to the disease and to those 
seeking treatment for it.
NIDA continues to support research that 
addresses the organizational, workforce, 
funding, and policy issues known to 
influence the success of addiction treatment. 
This includes cost-effectiveness and 
implementation research to determine how 
best to overcome systemic obstacles and 
foster the adoption of proven treatments 
by communities nationwide (see Sidebar 
18). Moreover, we continue to build our 
productive partnerships with state agencies 
and encourage them to team with research 
organizations to enhance their research 
capacity and their delivery of publicly 
supported drug abuse treatments. 
NIDA is also working to engage the medical 
community in drug abuse screening and 
referral to treatment. Primary care physicians 
are ideally positioned to serve as the first 
line of defense for detecting drug use 
early and for referring symptomatic drug-
abusing patients to specialized treatment. 
Therefore, NIDA continues to make research 
on screening and brief intervention (SBI) a 
strategic priority, focusing first on primary 
care and emergency room physicians. SBI 
has already been shown to be effective in 
reducing alcohol and tobacco use, though 
more research is needed for effects on illicit 
and prescription drug abuse. Also, drug abuse 
can influence the course and progression of 

--- PAGE 37 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'Vision', 'research areas'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
33
other medical diseases (including adherence 
to treatment regimens), underscoring the need 
for screening.   
Our Vision for the Future of 
Treatment for Drug Abuse and 
Addiction 
NIDA’s research program is entering an 
exciting new era in which treatments will 
be increasingly tailored to the individual––a 
more personalized approach that will 
translate into better and more cost-effective 
treatments for substance abuse disorders. This 
approach will be more effective than past 
approaches thanks to our new understanding 
of the plastic adaptations that characterize 
addiction. These adaptations erode the very 
same neural substrates that enable functions 
such as self-control, decisionmaking, accurate 
reward prediction, motivation, and memory. 
We are committed to harnessing knowledge 
on how drugs affect circuits and behaviors 
and parlaying it into effective treatments to 
restore the addicted brain and allow people to 
regain their cognitive abilities and capacity to 
enjoy life.
Glimpses of this future can already be 
seen in various research areas. Indeed, 
next-generation screening and monitoring 
devices, therapeutic compounds, behavioral 
interventions, and neurofeedback training 
(see Sidebar 19) suggest a panoply of 
treatment options to efficiently counteract 
the drug-induced breakdown in brain 
neurochemistry. Addiction treatments will 
become increasingly adept at reducing 
the rewarding properties of drugs while 
enhancing those of healthier alternatives. 
Inhibiting conditioned memories and 
strengthening cognitive control are other 
treatment objectives.  
In the future, we will seize upon new 
therapeutic opportunities stemming from 
deciphering an individual’s genetic code to 
better prevent and cure disease. At the same 
time, however, we must recognize the responsibility that comes 
with such technological advances to ensure confidentiality and 
privacy.  
NIDA is constantly striving to transform scientific insight into 
effective and responsible public health interventions. This 
endeavor continues to be shaped by promising discoveries and by 
the accompanying need to consider ethical concerns when treating 
illnesses like drug addiction.
Sidebar 19
Neurofeedback Offers Exciting 
Potential for Future Use with 
Addicted Patients
Researchers are exploring the use of 
neurofeedback, where subjects are trained 
to modulate neural activity in specific 
regions of their brains by having pictorial 
representations of the activity in those areas 
fed back to them in real time. Though not yet 
demonstrated for addiction, this technique 
has shown promising results for altering the 
perception of pain in some healthy adults 
and chronic pain patients. 
Why it’s important:
 This line of 
research could evolve into a powerful 
psychotherapeutic intervention capable 
of restoring function to the circuits and 
behaviors impaired by addiction.
Source: DeCharms et al., 2006 – Proc Natl Acad Sci 102(51):18626–
18631

--- PAGE 38 matched=['Strategic Goal', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
34
III. HIV/AIDS
Strategic Goal
To diminish the spread of drug abuse-related human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) and minimize the associated health and social consequences, 
including acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Objectives
1. To support research to better understand the etiology, pathogenesis, 
and spread of HIV/AIDS among drug-abusing populations.
2. To help prevent the acquisition (primary prevention) and transmission 
(secondary prevention) of HIV among drug abusers and their partners.
3. To decrease the health disparities associated with HIV/AIDS.
4. To support international research on the intertwined epidemics of drug 
abuse and HIV/AIDS.
5. To improve HIV treatment and outcomes in drug abusers through a 
better understanding of interactions with drugs of abuse, HIV/AIDS 
disease processes, and the medications used to treat both.
Introduction: The Need for Responsive Prevention  
and Treatment Strategies
HIV/AIDS remains one of the most serious medical consequences of drug abuse. 
Thus, NIDA continues to support research to improve HIV prevention among 
drug abusers and enhance treatment access and use for HIV/AIDS and other co-
occurring conditions, particularly hepatitis C (HCV) infection (85–90 percent of 
HIV-positive injection drug users [IDUs] are also HCV-positive). For example, 
NIDA continues to study HCV treatment patterns in patients with and without 
HIV co-infection to examine clinical outcomes following treatment.      
Our strategic plan relies on research across diverse areas, including basic science, 
epidemiology, prevention, health disparities, medical interactions, and disease 
consequences. To effectively diminish the spread and consequences of HIV/
AIDS, we must better understand how HIV is transmitted among different 
groups and communities. Genetics research will elucidate individual factors that 
determine vulnerability or resistance to infection and to disease progression. 
Epigenetic studies may offer clues as to how the virus becomes incorporated into 

--- PAGE 39 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
35
cells, but remains latent. In addition, studies 
that advance our knowledge of the changing 
behavioral and social epidemiology of drug 
abuse, HIV/AIDS, and comorbid conditions 
will help guide our approach to preventing 
HIV transmission. W
e have already learned 
important lessons by focusing on (1) the 
link between drug abuse and risky sexual 
behaviors and (2) the distinct characteristics 
of the epidemic among special populations 
(women, youth, minorities, prisoners).
A key step in curtailing the spread of HIV 
is improving our understanding of why 
certain populations are exceptionally 
vulnerable, along with developing primary 
prevention strategies that target infection 
among high-risk groups. The Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
estimates that 21 percent of people living 
with HIV in the United States do not know 
they are infected,
21 which heightens their 
risk of unknowingly transmitting the virus.  
Therefore, NIDA also supports research to 
develop effective secondary prevention 
strategies that promote testing and education 
among the undiagnosed to further reduce 
HIV transmission. NIDA is building on 
earlier research that helped prompt the 
CDC’s decision to broaden its guidelines 
for providing HIV screening to populations 
at risk. An important aspect of encouraging 
testing and counseling is the need to make 
followup treatment more accessible to 
people with HIV and substance abuse 
problems.
A disproportionate number of affected 
people are ethnic minorities, whose access to 
and utilization of treatment options is often 
limited. Such health disparities particularly 
affect African-Americans, who also tend to 
be late testers, putting them at greater risk 
for disease transmission and accelerated 
disease progression. Gathering meaningful 
data on the various factors contributing to 
these disparities is integral to efforts to resolve them 
through earlier diagnosis and treatment. Moreover, HIV/
AIDS associated with drug use continues to expand 
globally. International research that systematically 
monitors changes and patterns in the transmission and 
manifestation of HIV disease will more effectively 
prevent and treat the AIDS epidemic.
Treatment with highly active antiretroviral therapy 
(HAART) can dramatically reduce HIV-related 
morbidity and mortality. HAART is enabling more 
people to live longer with HIV , helping to redefine 
it as a chronic illness. This circumstance brings 
about accompanying chronic medical disease 
consequences—particularly, adverse consequences 
for the brain. Moreover, interactions between 
neurological complications, substance abuse, and other 
comorbid psychiatric disorders may contribute to poor 
adherence and worse outcomes, requiring responsive 
counterinterventions. To optimize HAART for drug 
abusers, we must investigate interactions between 
HAART, drugs of abuse, and medications used to treat 
addiction. More research is needed to better understand 
and address the long-term clinical complications in drug-
abusing populations. 
Finally, because HIV/AIDS extends across many public 
health domains, NIDA is collaborating on projects 
with other NIH Institutes and Centers, focusing on 
complementary work in the areas of drug abuse, HIV/
AIDS, and other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). 


--- PAGE 40 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
36
Figure 2
AIDS from injection drug use has declined steadily 
while risk from heterosexual contact has increased
*Heterosexual contact with a person known to have, or to be at high risk for, HIV infection.
Percentages of AIDS Cases Among Adults and  
Adolescents by Transmission Category and Year of  
Diagnosis In United States and Dependent Areas
Note: Data have been adjusted for reporting delays and missing 
risk-factor information. 
Source: CDC, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008
Strategic Approaches to  
HIV/AIDS Research
NIDA continues to encourage basic, clinical, services, 
and natural history research that explores the underlying 
mechanisms of HIV-associated health outcomes in the 
context of drug abuse. 
1. How has the HIV/AIDS epidemic changed over the 
past few decades in the United States?
The patterns of HIV/AIDS relative to drug abuse are 
changing in this country. Formerly, injection drug use 
was a main vector through which HIV was spread. 
However, over the past three decades, a substantial 
reduction has occurred in the proportion of new HIV/
AIDS cases attributable to injection drug use. NIDA 
research that has resulted in improved 
treatment for injection drug users (e.g., 
methadone and buprenorphine for heroin 
addiction) has contributed to this decline. 
At the same time, the proportion of cases 
attributable to high-risk heterosexual 
contact has increased steadily (see  
Figure 2).  
Recent findings illustrate the trend in HIV 
infection moving from injection drug use 
to noninjection drug use (see Sidebar 20). 
Drug use impairs people’s judgment and 
lowers their inhibitions, which can lead to 
impulsive and unsafe behaviors; therefore, 
effective drug abuse treatment is also HIV 
prevention. Indeed, the integration of HIV 
risk-reduction interventions into drug abuse 
treatment is imperative.  
Epidemiological and natural history 
studies help us to monitor epidemic 
trends, follow more closely the changing 
clinical manifestations of HIV disease 
and comorbid conditions, and measure the 
effects of HIV prevention efforts among 
drug abusers. New studies will also inform 
the development of effective primary 
and secondary prevention interventions. 
Looking at diverse settings can help us 
characterize individual risk factors as 
well as the influence of social and sexual 
networks, environmental contexts, and 
their interactions. Such research will help 
elucidate HIV transmission dynamics, the 
disparate health effects of drug use and 
HIV/AIDS among different populations, 
and the best ways to reach them. 
NIDA is focusing more intently on criminal 
justice populations to learn how best to 
address the special risks of a group with 
high drug abuse and background infection 
rates compared with the general population. 
This pertains to populations both in prison 
or jail and upon return to the community.

--- PAGE 41 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
37
For more information 
visit our Web site at: 
www.drugabuse.gov
2. How does NIDA plan to focus research 
efforts to better understand and 
prevent HIV infection in drug abusers 
and limit its progression? 
NIDA’s basic research portfolio will focus 
on host and viral factors related to HIV 
susceptibility and progression in drug 
abusers. Genetics, epigenetics, proteomics, 
and other related high-throughput 
technologies will be employed. These can 
help identify changes in gene and protein 
expression, as well as molecular signatures 
of disease vulnerability and progression in 
both humans and model organisms.  
Another promising new area of study with 
respect to AIDS progression involves 
the depletion of T cells in gut-associated 
lymphoid tissue (GALT) in the very early 
stages of HIV infection. This depletion––and 
how well it is restored with antiretroviral 
treatment––seems to determine the 
outcome of infection, or how quickly AIDS 
progresses. NIDA is interested in research 
on the link between substance abuse and 
the GALT immune responses. We also want 
to learn more about the impact of HAART 
on the restoration of the gastrointestinal 
mucosal immune system––within the 
context of substance abuse. A new research 
initiative will encourage basic and clinical 
research in these areas.  
Sidebar 20
Non-Injection Drug Abuse is Also 
Risky for Spreading HIV
Rates of HIV infection are converging in 
drug abusers who inject drugs and those 
who do not inject. This indicates that HIV is 
being spread among drug abusers by means 
other than needle sharing (i.e., risky sexual 
behaviors). 
Why it’s important: 
We need to shift 
focus toward reducing risky sexual behaviors 
among drug abusers, regardless of the route 
of drug administration.
Source: Des Jarlais et al., 2007 AIDS, 21:231–235
Primary prevention efforts to reduce drug  
abuse–HIV risk 
behaviors
HIV prevention must be a component of early drug abuse 
prevention efforts. Therefore, NIDA-supported research aims 
to develop and test new age-appropriate behavioral HIV 
risk-reduction interventions that start with the youngest age 
groups and “grow” along with them. NIDA is supporting 
initiatives aimed at developing youth- and community-
based HIV prevention programs designed specifically for 
urban youth, a population that is considered particularly 

--- PAGE 42 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
38
Sidebar 21
Interactive “Video Doctor” 
Approach Shows Promise for 
Reducing Drug Use and HIV Risk 
Behaviors
A novel “video doctor” intervention in primary 
care settings reduced risky behaviors among 
HIV-positive patients. Using computer 
simulation, an actor-portrayed physician 
engaged patients in a confidential “face-
to-face” discussion about their behaviors. 
The intervention group reported significantly 
reduced drug use, risky drinking, and 
unprotected sex, an effect that persisted at 
the 6-month followup.  
Why it’s important: 
Such interventions 
could provide a comparatively low-cost 
means of reaching and teaching patients and 
may be an important addition to risk reduction 
efforts in routine clinical practice.
Source: Gilbert P. et al., April 2008 – PLoS ONE 3(4): e1988.
vulnerable to drug abuse and HIV exposure. 
We continue to support research to develop 
innovative means of delivering prevention 
programs to various high-risk populations.
Secondary prevention efforts to reduce 
HIV risk behaviors  
More attention needs to be given to strate-
gies for how best to incorporate HIV educa-
tion, testing, counseling, and referral into 
drug abuse treatment and outreach efforts. 
This direction requires that we identify 
and address barriers, including stigma and 
treatment access—both for HIV and drug 
abuse––that restrict the benefits associated 
with early HIV detection and linkage to 
care. It also requires finding creative new 
ways to reach and motivate patients (see 
Sidebar 21).
To assist in these efforts, NIDA is pursuing 
research on the best ways to integrate testing 
and counseling into drug abuse treatment 
settings in communities, among criminal 
justice populations, and in international 
regions hit especially hard by the epidemic. 
This includes efforts to advance the 
adoption of rapid-screen technologies. 
Screening for HIV in health care settings 
is as cost-effective as screening for other 
common diseases;
22 thus, it makes sense to 
incorporate screening among populations 
where HIV risk is higher than average. 
Individuals who learn they are HIV-positive 
can significantly reduce their risk behaviors 
and, when linked to HAART, become less 
efficient transmitters from the resulting 
reduction in viral load. Therefore, such 
screening would not only provide important 
health and survival benefits for those 
with HIV , but would also help mitigate 
the likelihood of HIV transmission to 
noninfected people.  
In community treatment programs affili-
ated with NIDA’s CTN and in the criminal 
justice system through our collaborative 
CJ-DATS initiative, NIDA plans to test HIV 

--- PAGE 43 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
39
rapid-screen technologies plus counseling to 
reduce risky sexual behaviors. To improve 
HIV outcomes for criminal justice popula-
tions before and after release, NIDA
 will 
test a new approach termed “Seek, Test, and 
Treat,” which involves reaching out to high-
risk, hard-to-reach groups who have not 
recently been tested (seek), providing HIV 
testing (test), and initiating, monitoring, and 
maintaining HAART therapy for those who 
test positive (treat). It also involves provid-
ing drug abuse treatment, without which 
individuals may not comply with their anti-
viral medications. NIDA hopes this initiative 
will not only expand access to HIV testing 
for those in the criminal justice system, but 
will improve the provision and maintenance 
of HAART following community reentry, 
when treatment lapse and viral load rebound 
can heighten risk of HIV transmission.  
3. What can be done to mitigate the 
health disparities associated with HIV/
AIDS?
While all groups are affected by HIV/
AIDS, not all are affected equally
. Associ-
ated health disparities fall disproportionately 
on ethnic minorities, particularly African-
Americans, who are at especially high risk 
for developing AIDS. Even though they 
comprise only 13 percent of the U.S. popu-
lation, African-Americans accounted for 
approximately half of the total AIDS cases 
diagnosed in 2007.
23 Consequences have 
been particularly harsh on African-American 
women, who accounted for 68 percent of the 
female HIV/AIDS diagnoses from 2001 to 
2004.
24 Focused research is needed to un-
derstand the factors leading to such dispari-
ties and to develop targeted interventions to 
reduce HIV/AIDS and its consequences.
Studies are also needed to characterize the 
risk-mitigating roles of culture, family, 
and environmental factors. Indeed, recent 
research suggests that a strategy of targeting 
risk behaviors at the individual level may 
work for Caucasians but not for African-Americans, a population 
that appears to be at very high risk for STDs even if their behavior is 
normative
25 (see Sidebar 22).
In addition, although the rates of testing are approximately equal 
across ethnic groups, minority members tend to be tested late in 
the course of infection and frequently experience delays in being 
linked to treatment. This delay contributes to meaningful health 
disparities in terms of disease consequences. W
e hope to improve 
this situation by increasing knowledge of HIV treatment, which is 
currently less among African-Americans and Hispanics than among 
Sidebar 22
Racial Health Disparities Go 
Beyond Individual Risk Factors
A study examining the relationship between 
race and sexually transmitted disease (STD)/
HIV prevalence showed Caucasian young 
adults in the United States to be at elevated 
STD/HIV risk only when their behavior is 
high-risk; whereas African-American young 
adults are at high risk even when their 
behavior is normative. 
Why it’s important: 
This study suggests 
that factors other than individual risk 
behaviors appear to account for racial health 
disparities, which argues for population-level 
interventions.
Source: Hallfors et al., 2007 – Am J Public Health 97(1):125–132

--- PAGE 44 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
40
Sidebar 23
NIDA Public Health Campaign 
Encourages Teens to ‘Learn the 
Link’ Between Drug and Alcohol 
Use and HIV
NIDA’s multimedia “Learn the Link” campaign 
uses TV, print, and Web public service 
announcements to send the message to 
America’s youth that using drugs and alcohol 
can have serious consequences, including 
HIV infection (http://hiv.drugabuse.gov/
index.html). NIDA’s new Spanish-language 
public service announcement is designed to 
reach Hispanic youth with culturally sensitive 
messages about HIV prevention.
Caucasians. NIDA is encouraging studies investigating 
the relationship of disease progression to treatment and 
service availability, awareness, and use by African-
Americans and other minority groups.    
Finally, aggressive outreach must be part of our 
strategy. Media campaigns must strive to inform high-
risk subgroups of the prevalence of HIV infection (see 
Sidebar 23); reduce stigma associated with testing; 
and provide testing, counseling, and treatment services 
through nontraditional avenues.
For more information 
visit our Web site at: 
www.drugabuse.gov
4. How is NIDA’s HIV research program 
contributing to global HIV prevention 
and treatment?
It is estimated that about 30 percent of 
new HIV infections worldwide (outside 
sub-Saharan Africa) stem from injection 
drug use.
26 Drug intoxication contributes 
an additional burden of new infections by 
facilitating risky sexual behaviors that can 
transmit HIV . In Eastern Europe and Central 
Asia, for example, intravenous drug use is 
driving 62 percent of new infections
27 and 
fueling a multidrug-resistant tuberculosis 
epidemic as well as higher rates of sexually 
transmitted diseases and HCV . Thus, our 
disease prevention strategies seek both 
to increase rates of HIV screening and to 
advance culturally relevant educational 
interventions that include information about 
drug abuse as a major vector for the spread 
of disease.
NIDA’s multifaceted response works to 
better integrate international initiatives 
by region and to take advantage of the 
international research infrastructure funded 
by the National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases. The latter aims to 
develop research that targets drug abuse 
treatment programs for their utility as HIV 
and HCV prevention approaches in different 
international settings (see Sidebar 24). These 
involve behavioral as well as medication 
interventions, such as the development of 
a heroin vaccine to help decrease injection 
transmission of HIV .

--- PAGE 45 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
41
5. What are we doing to improve HIV/
AIDS treatment and outcomes in drug 
abusers?
The development of HAART has enabled 
many HIV-infected individuals to experience 
remarkable improvements in their general 
health and quality of life. However, since 
drug abuse can interfere with the efficacy 
of HAART, an urgent need exists to better 
understand drug interactions, both between 
drugs of abuse and HAART and between 
prescribed anti-addiction medications and 
HAART. This interaction can decrease the 
efficacy of a given treatment.
Recent studies show that injection drug 
users can benefit from HAART therapy 
just as people do who do not inject drugs.
28 
Nonetheless, nonadherence to antiretroviral 
therapy could impact treatment response or 
the development of resistance to HAART. 
Adherence can be particularly problematic 
for drug abusers with chaotic lifestyles, 
which can interfere with their ability to 
follow prescribed regimens. In addition, 
because HAART reduces viral load, some 
patients mistakenly believe that they do not 
need to adhere to the treatment regimen or 
that reduced viral load means elimination 
of the risk of transmitting HIV . This belief 
can, in turn, lead to complacency about 
risk behaviors and resumption of unsafe 
sex and injection practices. NIDA supports 
research to better assess the extent to which 
HIV-positive drug abusers adhere to their 
HAART medications, along with research 
to improve medication adherence among 
substance abusers.  
Sidebar 24
Effective Drug Abuse Medications 
Being Adopted by HIV-Plagued 
Countries
Malaysia has lagged behind in the treatment 
of drug addiction and related disorders, even 
as it is coping with the second highest HIV 
prevalence rate among adult populations 
and the highest proportion of HIV cases 
from injection drug use. Historically, drug 
abusers were “rehabilitated” involuntarily 
in correctional facilities. This primarily 
criminal treatment approach had limited 
effectiveness, which led to widespread public 
dissatisfaction and the recent introduction 
of medications for addiction. These include 
naltrexone (1999), buprenorphine (2001), 
and methadone (2003). 
Why it’s important: These drug 
treatment programs, rapidly embraced by 
the country’s medical community, have 
resulted in tens of thousands of opiate-
dependent patients receiving medical 
treatment. A similar success story is starting 
to unfold in China as well. Such treatment 
success stories encourage other countries to 
establish their own drug treatment programs.  
Russia, for example, continues to prohibit 
the use of opioid agonist maintenance 
treatments.
Source: Mazlan et al., 2006 – Drug Alcohol Rev 25(5):473–478

--- PAGE 46 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
42
Sidebar 25
HIV
Pharmacogenomics is Transforming 
our Ability to Predict Medication 
Effectiveness
The harnessing of increasingly powerful genomic 
tools and databases is already having an impact on 
our ability to predict response to medications and 
to deliver treatments. Continuous advances in the 
nascent field of pharmacogenomics are bound to 
greatly increase the efficacy of pharmacotherapeutics 
by matching a medication with the patients who, 
based on their genetic background, are most likely to 
benefit from it and suffer the least adverse effects.
Case in point: Abacavir (Ziagen) is an antiretroviral medication that works by slowing 
the spread of HIV infection in the body. Abacavir is not a cure and does not prevent the 
spread of HIV, but it is used in combination with other medications to treat HIV infection 
in patients with or without AIDS. Unfortunately, excitement over abacavir’s therapeutic 
promise has been dampened by severe allergic reactions that can lead to death. However, 
recent studies have established that the serious and sometimes fatal hypersensitivity 
reactions are significantly more common in patients with a particular human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) allele, HLA-B*5701. 
Why it’s important: The research suggests that a pretreatment genetic screen for 
HLA-B*5701 can reduce the risk of hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir by close to 100 
percent, enhancing the therapeutic potential of this promising medication.  
Source: Mallal et al., 2008 – NEJM 358:568–579
Integrating treatment of HIV and HCV 
with drug abuse treatment services is one 
of NIDA’s pivotal goals. This requires us to 
identify the organizational factors that limit 
the provision of coordinated drug abuse, 
HIV , HCV , and other treatment services; 
evaluate innovative approaches to achieve 
better treatment coordination; and determine 
the behavioral and social supports needed by 
drug abusers to engage in and adhere to HIV 
treatment regimens.
Supporting studies to examine conditions 
that result from HIV/AIDS infection and 
drug abuse 
Because of HIV’
s ability to invade the brain, 
it is often complicated by central nervous 
system dysfunction. Before the advent of 
HAART, approximately 20 percent of those 
living with HIV eventually developed HIV-
associated dementia (HAD),
29 characterized 
by a loss of mental functioning with notable 

--- PAGE 47 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'Vision'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
43
motor deficits. HAART has reduced the 
prevalence of HAD; however, the preva
-
lence of milder forms of neurological 
complications may be increasing because 
more people are living longer with the 
disease.
30
Emerging evidence suggests a relationship 
between drug abuse (particularly 
stimulants) and accelerated or more 
severe nervous system complications 
of HIV (or neuroAIDS). Because HIV-
positive drug abusers can suffer greater 
neurological complications, it is critical to 
better understand how drug abuse affects 
disease progression and pathology. NIDA 
is encouraging both animal and human 
studies examining the interactions between 
drugs of abuse and HIV with respect to 
neuropathological and neurobehavioral 
effects.
We are also interested in research tools 
that may provide information on latent 
viral infection in the brain. Animal 
models are valuable for examining the 
basic mechanisms of HIV-associated 
disease progression and resulting brain 
dysfunction in the context of substance 
abuse. A broad range of anticipated 
studies will increase collaboration among 
researchers in multiple areas, including 
drug abuse, virology, neurobiology, and 
immunology. 
What Is NIDA’s Vision of the Future?
Our ultimate vision is the eradication of HIV/
AIDS throughout the world. This would require the 
development and worldwide distribution of effective 
prevention strategies (behavioral interventions and, 
perhaps, a vaccine) and therapeutic interventions. We 
will also ensure that drug abusers are represented in 
trials for all types of interventions as we strengthen 
our national collaborative network to conduct clinical 
trials. Expected areas of research concentration include 
promising behavioral, microbicidal, prophylactic, 
therapeutic, and vaccine modalities in HIV-infected 
patients and those at risk of infection. Further, through 
pharmacogenomic studies, we expect to be able to 
tailor therapies to minimize adverse reactions and 
drug interactions (see Sidebar 25). And, given that 
drug abuse may play a unique role in exacerbating 
neurologic and psychiatric consequences, the future 
should see significant efforts applied to understanding 
their pathogenesis and to developing better therapies for 
addressing associated impairments. Finally, we envision 
adapting and translating interventions proven effective in 
this country to other areas of the world. 
For more information 
visit our Web site at: 
www.drugabuse.gov

--- PAGE 48 matched=['CROSS-CUTTING PRIORIT', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
44
IV. CROSS-CUTTING PRIORITIES
Several additional priority areas span NIDA’s portfolio and contribute 
to our overall mission to prevent or reduce drug abuse and addiction.
These areas are highlighted below.
Major Goals 
1. To foster research on other health conditions that may inform, 
influence, or interact with drug abuse and addiction (e.g., pain, compulsive 
behavioral disorders).
2. To decrease health disparities related to drug addiction and its 
consequences.
3. To educate a variety of audiences (e.g., criminal justice, medical, and 
educational systems in the community; media; and legislators) about the 
science underlying drug abuse.
4. To train and attract new investigators with diverse experiences—
including those from minority or disadvantaged backgrounds—and to 
actively recruit chemists, physicists, bioengineers, and mathematicians to 
conduct translational research on drug abuse.
5. To promote collaborative international research activities that address 
nicotine addiction, HIV/AIDS, and emerging trends, as well as training 
and dissemination of science-based information on drug abuse.
.
NIDA has built a solid foundation designed to 
achieve these goals by nurturing interactions 
with different NIH Institutes, agencies, and 
other stakeholders, and by supporting research 
and outreach that respond to the following five 
questions:
1. What are other health conditions that 
interact with drug abuse and addiction?
Multiple health conditions share important 
features with drug abuse and addiction. 
Thus, research in these areas may inform and 
impact drug abuse research and vice versa. 
For example, the brain circuitry involved in 
natural rewards that motivate us to engage in 
everyday survival behaviors, such as eating, 
overlaps with the neural circuitry engaged 
by addictive drugs to reinforce drug taking. 
These brain circuits are part of normal adaptive 
processes; and when challenged with powerful
reinforcers such as drugs of abuse or fattening 
foods, these circuits can bring about a loss of 
control and subsequent addiction or obesity, 
respectively.   
Understanding the biological underpinnings 
of how addiction and other independent or 
co-occurring disorders (e.g., compulsive 
behavioral disorders, pain, etc.) interrelate 
may give us insight into more effective 
treatment and prevention approaches for 
these disorders. NIDA continues to encourage 
research to explore these linkages from several
perspectives—basic biology, epidemiology, 
prevention, and treatment––with the hope of 
leveraging the science from one disorder to 
inform another.

--- PAGE 49 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
45
Compulsive Behavior Disorders. A number of 
mental disorders have hallmark symptoms (e.g., 
compulsive behaviors and obsessive thinking) 
similar to those of addiction, with obsessive-
compulsive disorders (OCDs) and eating dis-
orders among the most common. Their shared 
symptomatology may reflect similarities in 
the brain regions affected by the disorder. For 
example, the orbitofrontal cortex, which has 
been associated with the subjective experience 
of drug craving in addicted subjects, has also 
been implicated in OCD behaviors. Similarly, 
reduced brain activity of dopamine, a naturally 
occurring substance that regulates feelings of 
pleasure, has been implicated both in drug ad-
diction and in obesity, which may reflect a com-
mon motivational deficit, but with food instead 
of drugs. Thus, NIDA seeks to understand the 
common etiologies of these disorders at the 
genetic, molecular, cellular, and circuit levels. 
Pain. For the more than 50 million Americans 
with chronic pain, prescription opioid pain 
medications are a necessary and useful treat-
ment. However, opioid treatment can produce 
negative health consequences, such as physical 
dependence and addiction. The prevalence of 
chronic pain and how to prevent, reduce, and 
treat its negative health consequences are not 
well understood. NIDA continues to examine 
the factors (including pain itself) that predis-
pose or protect pain patients from opioid abuse 
and addiction. We also are pursuing ways 
to prevent opioid abuse when treating pain, 
including supporting development of novel 
pain medications with reduced or no abuse and 
addiction liability. 
2. How is NIDA addressing health 
disparities related to drug abuse and its 
consequences?
The pattern of addictions and the burden of 
disease are not shared equally among members 
of our population. For example, the dispro-
portionate abuse of methamphetamine among 
American Indians and Alaskan Natives––higher 
than any other subgroup––prompts a need for 
targeted interventions that can effectively reach 
these groups. However, contrary to a common stereotype, overall 
rates of drug abuse among racial and ethnic minorities, particularly 
African-Americans and Hispanics, are similar to rates in the gener-
al population. Nonetheless, these groups incur greater medical and 
social consequences of their drug use than Whites (see Figure 3), 
including involvement with the criminal justice system and greater 
disease vulnerability (see section III, “HIV/AIDS”).
Figure 3
Incarceration rates and HIV incidence in IDUs are 
disproportionately higher in ethnic minorities 
(A)
(B)
Ethnic Breakdown of (A) Incarceration Rates for Drug 
Abusers, 2006, and (B) Incidence of HIV in IDUs, 2007
Sources: (a) U.S. Census Bureau, Population Estimates Program, 2006; 
NSDUH, 2007; U.S. DOJ, BJS, Prisoners in 2006, Bulletin (b) U.S. Census 
Bureau, Population Estimates Program, 2007; NSDUH, 2008; CDC, HIV/
AIDS Surveillance in Injection Drug Users (through 2007)

--- PAGE 50 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
46
Sidebar 26
NIDA-Developed Materials on 
Drug Abuse Widely Used in School 
Curricula 
Brain Power! The NIDA Junior Scientist 
Program is designed to take students 
through a step-by-step exploration of the 
scientific process and how to apply it to learn 
about the brain and the effects of drugs 
on the nervous system and body.  Such 
materials have already been developed for 
elementary and middle school grades K-9.
NIDA has developed a separate Strategic Plan on Reduc-
ing Health Disparities that includes research, infrastruc-
ture and capacity building, and community outreach 
components (for more details, see http://www.drugabuse.
gov/StrategicPlan/HealthStratPlan.html). Brief high-
lights of our ongoing and planned activities follow:
• Epidemiologic data clearly show that minority groups 
differ in drug use patterns, preferences, accessibility, 
and risks. Thus, research is needed to look at factors 
that convey protection or risk across different ethnic 
and age categories. Studies must examine the role 
of culture, religion, ethnic identity, family, peer, 
and environmental/community-level factors in drug 
initiation and drug abuse trajectories. 
• We must also better understand the racial/
ethnic implications of genetic variation 
that modifies the neurotoxicity of differ-
ent drugs, as well as the neurobiological 
processes underlying tolerance, depen-
dence, and relapse. Pharmacokinetic 
studies have revealed distinct differences 
in some ethnic populations’ ability to 
metabolize different drugs–– this affects 
sensitivity to the drugs’ or medications’ 
pharmacological effects.
3. How does NIDA “get the word out” 
about the many facets of drug abuse 
and addiction to better prevent it? 
As the supporter of most of the world’s 
research on the health aspects of drug abuse 
and addiction, NIDA is uniquely positioned 
to educate the public and displace long-held 
mistaken beliefs about drug abuse with sci-
entific evidence about drugs and addiction. 
Because most drug use begins during ado-
lescence, it is vitally important that youth 
are informed of drugs’ effects on their devel-
oping brains and bodies to help them choose 
not to use drugs.  
• NIDA continues to develop and update 
science-based educational materials for 
grades K–12 (and beyond) and dissemi-
nate them for free to schools (see Sidebar 
26). By exposing children of all ages to 
neurobiology and drug education in fun, 
age-appropriate, and relevant ways, we 
hope to prevent them from using drugs 
and also spark their interest in scientific 
careers.    
• NIDA is updating the design of our 
“NIDA for Teens” Web site (http://teens.
drugabuse.gov), aimed primarily at 
educating middle school adolescents ages 
11–15 (as well as their parents and teach-
ers) on the science behind drug abuse. We 
have enlisted the help of teens in develop-

--- PAGE 51 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
47
ing this site to ensure that the content ad-
dresses appropriate questions and timely 
concerns. Interactive games are among 
the recent additions. 
• NIDA intends to expand our foray into 
new media. We have begun a blog aimed 
at teens and use it as a two-way com-
munications tool, responding to the 
many comments it elicits.  NIDA has 
also started “tweeting” and continues to 
place short, topical videos on YouTube, as 
well as host a MySpace page on the link 
between drugs and HIV . As an expansion 
of our annual “Chat Day,” where students 
from across the country learn the facts 
about drug abuse from NIDA scientists, 
NIDA plans in 2010 to launch “National 
Drug Facts Week,” with Chat Day at 
its center.  Other events will take place 
nationwide to arm teens with information 
that can help them make healthy deci-
sions.
• NIDA continues to design and develop 
public information and education cam-
paigns, as well as materials on drug abuse 
and addiction for a variety of audiences. 
For example, we are building on the suc-
cess of our award-winning public service 
announcement on the link between drug 
abuse and HIV/AIDS risk, and continue 
to take advantage of mainstream and 
emerging media vehicles such as HBO 
broadcasts (see Sidebar 27) and Internet 
chats.   
4. How does NIDA help ensure a 
continuing supply of well-trained 
scientists equipped to conduct high-
impact drug abuse research? 
An important part of NIDA’s mission is 
to  promote an ongoing source of trained 
clinicians and clinical research scientists 
from diverse backgrounds who can conduct 
research on various aspects of addiction, 
including HIV/AIDS, health disparities, 
Sidebar 27
NIDA Works with HBO and Other 
Partners to Present ‘Addiction’ 
Documentary
NIDA partnered with HBO, NIAAA, and 
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation 
on a groundbreaking and Emmy Award–
winning documentary called Addiction. 
The feature-length film is part of a 
multimedia public health campaign that 
also included a Web site, book, and 
community outreach activities. The goal 
of this project, launched in 2007, was to 
help Americans understand addiction 
as a chronic yet treatable brain disease 
through spotlighting promising scientific 
advancements and personal testimonials. 
Circulation of these materials has reached 
tens of millions.

--- PAGE 52 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'research areas'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
48
Sidebar 28
Research Training Programs 
Ensure Continuing Supply of 
Investigators Studying Drug Abuse 
and Addiction
NIDA offers a strategic set of funding 
mechanisms to support the development of 
research scientists through various stages 
of their careers. These awards are designed 
to ensure that scientists of the very highest 
caliber are available in adequate numbers 
and in the appropriate research areas and 
fields to meet the Nation’s need for drug 
abuse and addiction research.
and other issues critical to drug abuse research. We also 
need to reach across domains to engage scientists from 
fields such as mathematics, bioengineering, and physics 
to apply their knowledge to the study of drug abuse and 
addiction.      
To sustain our research infrastructure, NIDA continues 
to support training initiatives that support a broad range 
of scientists, from diverse backgrounds, both within 
and across scientific boundaries (see Sidebar 28). The 
following briefly summarize several initiatives:
• National Research Service Awards 
(NRSA) to institutions and individuals, 
including the predoctoral diversity 
awards. NIDA currently funds more than 
50 institutional training sites for both 
predoctoral and postdoctoral fellows 
nationwide.
• Career Development (Mentored K) 
Awards for emerging scientists or those 
changing career trajectories to study drug 
abuse and its related consequences (e.g., 
HIV/AIDS). These include the Mentored 
Clinical Scientist Development Award 
(K08) and Mentored Patient-Oriented 
Research Career Development Award 
(K23), designed to provide “protected 
time” for clinically trained individuals 
to participate in an intensive, supervised 
training program in biomedical or patient-
oriented drug abuse research. The K25 
Award is for quantitative scientists 
interested in applying their expertise to 
research related to drug abuse or HIV/
AIDS.
• Pathway to Independence (PI) 
Award Program (K99/R00), designed 
to augment existing programs that 
provide mentored research and career 
development experiences for new 
investigators. This program provides a 
unique opportunity for highly promising 
postdoctoral scientists to obtain support 
for both the initial 1–2-year mentored 
phase and the later independent phase, 
before applying for an NIH R01 grant.  
• Dissertation Awards (R36) for specific 
drug abuse topic areas; Research 
Education Awards (R25) for curriculum 
and program development; and Small 
Grant Programs (R03) to allow 
researchers new to a field to obtain data 
for developing research programs in 
needed areas, such as imaging, AIDS, 
behavioral research, and chemistry. 

--- PAGE 53 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
49
Diversity Supplements and other 
training experiences are available for 
minority students, beginning in high 
school and continuing through their 
postdoctoral phase and beyond.  
• NIH Loan Repayment Programs, 
a vital component of our Nation’s 
efforts to attract health professionals to 
research careers, are reflective of NIDA’s 
commitment to developing clinical and 
pediatric researchers.
• Diversity-Promoting Institutions’ Drug 
Abuse Research Programs (DIDARP) 
include grants and cooperative 
agreements, aimed at building research 
capacity at institutions serving minority 
populations.
5. What are NIDA’s strategic    
international priorities? 
Since the early 1990s, the NIDA 
International Program has worked to create 
local, regional, national, and international 
networks that advance scientific knowledge 
through research. The International Program 
extends our mission through building 
up other countries’ research capacities 
to address the public health impact of 
drug abuse and addiction by creating 
opportunities for collaboration, training, 
and scientific exchange, and disseminating 
that knowledge to scientists, treatment 
providers, and policymakers around the 
world. These efforts help to translate our 
domestic successes in curtailing drug abuse 
and related consequences, such as with HIV/
AIDS, to other countries, and allow us to 
learn from their strides in disease prevention 
and eradication.
Stemming the global spread of drug abuse-related HIV 
is a top NIDA priority for our international efforts (see 
section III, question 5), and one for which international 
collaboration is vital. Through our International 
Program, NIDA is facilitating collaborations with 
partners in about 20 countries, developing research 
networks and tailoring studies to meet local needs 
and conditions. In addition, NIDA is to become a 
Collaborating Center of the World Health Organization, 
formalizing the long-standing cooperation between the 
two agencies.      
Among the top priorities are reducing nicotine addiction 
and gaining knowledge about new drug abuse trends 
internationally. While smoking prevention and cessation 
programs have contributed to a significant decline 
in the United States, the rest of the world continues 
to experience high rates of smoking and associated 
illnesses. NIDA continues to work cooperatively with 
other countries to reduce smoking worldwide and 
to share the latest research findings by facilitating 
collaboration with U.S.-based resources.  
As new drug abuse threats emerge around the world, 
we identify and address them. NIDA has identified 
five research priorities for which we are advancing 
international collaborative efforts to set standards, 
design comparative research protocols, and improve data 
collection on core variables—all to ensure a scientific 
approach to the study of these priorities. These five 
priorities are (1) linkages between HIV/AIDS and drug 
abuse; (2) adolescent and prenatal tobacco exposure; (3) 
inhalant abuse; (4) methamphetamine; and (5) drugged 
driving.   
As part of efforts to increase the capacity and capability 
of affected countries, NIDA’s International Program 
works closely with the Fogarty International Center, 
whose mission is to facilitate international cooperation 
throughout NIH. In collaboration with the Fogarty 
International Center’s AIDS International Training 
and Research Program, we support

--- PAGE 54 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
 
50
References
1 Johnston, L.D., O’Malley, P.M., Bachman, J.G., and Schulenberg, J.E. (2009). Monitoring the Future National 
Results on Adolescent Drug Use: Overview of Key Findings, 2008 (NIH Publication No. 09-7401). Bethesda, MD: 
National Institute on Drug Abuse.
2 Paulozzi, L.J., Budnitz, D.S., and Yongli, X. (2006).  Increasing deaths from opioid analgesics in the United 
States. Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety 15:618–627.
3 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2009). Results from the 2008 National Survey on 
Drug Use and Health: National Findings (Office of Applied Studies, NSDUH Series H-36, HHS Publication No. 
SMA 09-4434). Rockville, MD. 
4 Tanney, B. (2000). Psychiatric diagnoses and suicidal acts. In R.W. Maris, A.L. Berman, and M.M. Silverman, 
eds., Comprehensive Textbook of Suicidology. New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
5 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. The NSDUH Report: Patterns and Trends in 
Nonmedical Prescription Pain Reliever Use: 2002 to 2005. (2007).  Rockville, MD. 
6 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2009). Results from the 2008 National Survey on 
Drug Use and Health: National Findings (Office of Applied Studies, NSDUH Series H-36, HHS Publication No. 
SMA 09-4434). Rockville, MD.
7 Johnston, L.D., O’Malley, P.M., Bachman, J.G., and Schulenberg, J.E. (2009). Monitoring the Future National 
Results on Adolescent Drug Use: Overview of Key Findings, 2008 (NIH Publication No. 09-7401). Bethesda, MD: 
National Institute on Drug Abuse.
8 Buka, S.L., Shenassa, E.D., and Niaura, R. (2003). Elevated risk of tobacco dependence among offspring of 
mothers who smoked during pregnancy: A 30-year prospective study. Am J Psychiatry 160(11):1978–1984.
9 Perrotti, L.I., Russo, S.J., Fletcher, H., Chin, J., Webb, T., Jenab, S., and Quinones-Jenab, V . (2001). Ovarian 
hormones modulate cocaine-induced locomotor and stereotypic activity. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences 937:202–216. 
10 Margolese, H.C., Malchy, L., Negrete, J.C., Tempier, R., and Gill, K. (2004). Drug and alcohol use among 
patients with schizophrenia and related psychoses: Levels and consequences. Schizophrenia Research 67(2–
3):157–166. 
11 Kalman, D., Morissette, S.B., and George, T.P. (2005). Co-morbidity of smoking in patients with psychiatric and 
substance use disorders. Am J Addict 14(2):106–123.
12 Griffin, K.W., Botvin, G.J., and Nichols, T.R. (2004). Long-term follow-up effects of a school-based drug abuse 
prevention program on adolescent risky driving. Prevention Science 5:207–212.

--- PAGE 55 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
  
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
51
13 Wilcox, H.C., Kellam, S.G., Brown, C.H., Poduska, J.M., Ialongo, N.S., Wang, W., and Anthony, J.C. (2008). 
The impact of two universal randomized first- and second-grade classroom interventions on young adult suicide 
ideation and attempts. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 95(Suppl 1):560–573.
14 Dackis, C.A., Kampman, K.M., Lynch, K.G., Pettinati, H.M., and O’Brien, C.P. (2005). A double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial of modafinil for cocaine dependence. Neuropsychopharmacology 30(1):205–211.
15 Bickel, W.K., Buchhalter, A.R., Marsch, L.A., and Badger, G.J. (2008). Computerized behavior therapy for 
opioid-dependent outpatients: A randomized controlled trial. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology 
16(2):132–143.
16 Carroll, K., Bell, S., Martino, S., Nich, C., Babuscio, T., Nuro, K., Gordon, M., Portnoy, G., and Rounsaville, B. 
(2007). Computer-assisted delivery of cognitive-behavioral therapy for addiction: A randomized clinical trial of 
CBT4CBT. The American Journal of Psychiatry 165(7):881–888. 
17 Ressler, K.J., Rothbaum, B.O., Tannenbaum, L., Anderson, P., Graap, K., Zimand, E., Hodges, L., and Davis, M. 
(2004). Cognitive enhancers as adjuncts to psychotherapy. Archives of General Psychiatry 61:1136–1144.
18 deCharms, C.R., Maeda, F., Glover, G.H., Ludlow, D., Pauly, J.M., Soneji, D., Gabrieli, J.D.E., and Mackey, S.C. 
(2005). Control over brain activation and pain learned by using real-time functional MRI. PNAS 102:18626–18631.
19 Conway, K.P., Compton, W., Stinson, F.S., and Grant, B.F. (2006). Lifetime comorbidity of DSM-IV mood and 
anxiety disorders and specific drug use disorders: Results from the National Epidemiological Survey on Alcohol 
and Related Conditions. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 67(2):247–257. 
20 Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century. Available 
at: http://www.nap.edu/books/0309072808/html. 
21 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2008). HIV Prevalence Estimates—United States, 2006. Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly Report 57(39):1073-1076. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm5739a2.htm.
22 Paltiel, A.D., Weinstein, M.C., Kimmel, A.D., Seage, G.R. III, Losina, E., Zhang, H., Freedberg, K.A., and 
Walensky, R.P. (2005). Expanded screening for HIV in the United States—an analysis of cost-effectiveness. New 
England Journal of Medicine 352(6):586–595.
23 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2007). HIV/AIDS Statistics and Surveillance. Available at: http://
www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/surveillance/basic.htm#exposure.
24 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2004). Diagnosis of HIV/AIDS-32 States 2000–2003. Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly Report 53(47):1106–1110. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm5347a3.htm.
References

--- PAGE 57 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse Strategic Plan
