# NIDDK (2025) — file: NIDDK_Strategic_Plan_for_Research_2025.pdf
# 41 pages matched priority-heading patterns


--- PAGE 1 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DIABETES AND 
DIGESTIVE AND KIDNEY DISEASES 
 
 
Strategic Plan for Research 
Pathways to health for all 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          December 2021 | updated April 2025  
 
  


--- PAGE 2 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'vision', 'mission'] ---
 
2 
DIRECTOR’S MESSAGE 
As the Director of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), I am 
pleased to present this Strategic Plan describing scientific goals and research opportunities. 
NIDDK supports and conducts research on some of the most common, chronic, costly, and 
consequential diseases, along with research on diseases and disorders that are less widespread but 
nonetheless devastating in their impacts. This research includes basic, clinical, and translational 
studies by scientists across the country at universities, small businesses, and other institutions to 
discover biological processes and other contributors to health and disease, test prevention and 
treatment strategies, and develop approaches to scale up and broaden the reach of evidence-based 
interventions. Knowledge gained from NIDDK-supported research is important for healthcare providers, 
people affected by disease and their families, and the public. NIDDK also supports research training 
and career development for the next generation of scientists. 
To identify key research challenges and opportunities for the future and to maximize the value of 
research investments, NIDDK regularly engages in research planning focused on the diseases within 
our mission, including diabetes and other endocrine and metabolic diseases; liver and other digestive 
diseases; nutritional disorders; obesity; and kidney, urologic, and hematologic diseases. To 
complement our disease-specific planning, NIDDK developed this overarching Strategic Plan. 
Extensive input from leading researchers and patient advocates across the country was integral to our 
planning process, as was broader public input.  
We established four scientific goals for this Strategic Plan, focused on advancing basic science 
research, clinical studies, dissemination and implementation research, and stakeholder engagement. 
An important cross-cutting topic for each of these goals is to strengthen biomedical research workforce 
training. The plan also highlights our commitment to serve as an efficient and effective steward of public 
resources. 
This Strategic Plan presents a broad vision for accelerating research on the diseases, conditions, and 
scientific areas under NIDDK’s mission. Many of these diseases are intertwined: some may share the 
same root causes; the presence of one disease may raise the risk of another; and treating one disease 
may improve the outcome of others. By leveraging these connections, supporting a talented scientific 
workforce, and engaging our many stakeholders, we can help ensure healthier lives and improved 
quality of life for all. Thus, the overarching theme of this Strategic Plan is Multidisciplinary 
Researchers, Many Stakeholders, Pathways to Health for All. 
In 2025, the Strategic Plan was updated to ensure it is aligned with the current Administration’s 
priorities and complies with this Administration’s Executive Orders. 
 
Griffin P. Rodgers, M.D., M.A.C.P. 
Director 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases  
National Institutes of Health 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services    

--- PAGE 3 matched=['Goal 1', 'Strategic Plan', 'Table of Contents'] ---
 
3 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
DIRECTOR’S MESSAGE ................................................................................................................. 2 
Table of Contents.............................................................................................................................. 3 
OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................. 4 
NIDDK Mission and Vision ............................................................................................... 4 
Framework for the Strategic Plan for NIDDK Research ................................................... 6 
NIDDK Organization ........................................................................................................ 7 
SCIENTIFIC GOALS ......................................................................................................................... 9 
Scientific Goal 1 – Advance understanding of biological pathways and environmental 
contributors to health and disease ......................................................................................... 9 
Research Opportunities .................................................................................................  11 
Scientific Goal 2 – Advance pivotal clinical studies and trials for prevention, treatment, and 
cures ................................................................................................................................... 17 
Research Opportunities .................................................................................................  18 
Scientific Goal 3 – Advance research to disseminate and implement evidence-based 
prevention strategies and treatments in clinics and community settings, to improve the health 
of all people, more rapidly and more effectively ...................................................................  26 
Research Opportunities .................................................................................................  27 
Scientific Goal 4 – Advance stakeholder engagement— including patients and other 
participants as true partners in research .............................................................................. 33 
Research Opportunities .................................................................................................  34 
Measuring progress toward achieving the Scientific Goals .................................................. 36 
STEWARDSHIP.............................................................................................................................. 38 
Planning and Priority Setting .......................................................................................... 38 
Scientific Stewardship – Opportunities ........................................................................... 39 
Management and Accountability – Opportunities ........................................................... 43 
DESCRIPTION OF THE STRATEGIC PLANNING PROCESS ....................................................... 43 
2019-2021: Developing the Strategic Plan  .................................................................... 43 
2025: Updates to the Strategic Plan .............................................................................. 44 
 
  

--- PAGE 4 matched=['Vision', 'Mission'] ---
 
4 
 
OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION 
NIDDK Mission and Vision 
 
Mission and Statutory Authority 
The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) was established in 1950 
as part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and acquired its current name in 1986. As authorized 
by Sections 426-434A of the Public Health Service Act [42 U.S.C. 285c – 285c-9], the mission of the 
NIDDK is to conduct and support medical research and research training and to disseminate science-
based information on diabetes and other endocrine and metabolic diseases; digestive diseases, 
nutritional disorders, and obesity; and kidney, urologic, and hematologic diseases, to improve people’s 
health and quality of life. 
 
 
As a whole, the diseases that fall within NIDDK’s mission are chronic, costly, and consequential for 
patients, their families, and the Nation, often with differential impact on different communities. 
Endocrine and metabolic diseases span a range of conditions. They include diabetes, which affects an 
estimated 34.2 million people in the United States.
1 The most common forms of diabetes are type 1 
diabetes, in which the body loses its ability to produce the hormone insulin as a result of an aberrant 
immune system attack; and type 2 diabetes, which is due to a combination of insulin resistance and 
insufficient insulin production. Women can also develop gestational diabetes, a form of the disease that 
is diagnosed during pregnancy and increases risk for later type 2 diabetes. There are other forms of 
diabetes that, although not as common, can still have devastating effects. A variety of factors increase 
risk for diabetes, including genetic, environmental, and other factors. Obesity is a strong risk factor for 
development of type 2 diabetes and gestational diabetes. Diabetes is associated with serious 
complications, such as heart disease and stroke, blindness, kidney failure, lower limb amputation, many 
forms of cancer, dementia, hearing loss, erectile dysfunction, urinary incontinence, and other adverse 
health conditions. Other endocrine and metabolic diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, osteoporosis, and 
hypothyroidism, also can be severe in their impacts.  
Obesity affects more than 40 percent of U.S. adults and over 19 percent of children and adolescents.
2 
Individuals with obesity may develop devastating health problems, face reduced life expectancy, and 
experience stigma and discrimination. Obesity results from a combination of genetic susceptibility, 
biological pathways related to metabolism and body weight regulation, and environmental and other 
factors. People who have obesity are at increased risk for type 2 diabetes, fatty liver disease, kidney 
disease, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and many other diseases. 
Digestive diseases affect the gastrointestinal tract, liver, gallbladder, and pancreas, and also include 
nutrition-related disorders. Digestive diseases, which can cause serious complications such as severe 
pain, elevated risk of cancer, or liver failure, accounted for an estimated 66.4 million ambulatory care 
visits to doctor’s offices, outpatient hospital clinics, and emergency departments in 2016.
3 Complex 

--- PAGE 5 matched=['Vision', 'mission'] ---
 
5 
interactions among genetic, environmental, immune, microbial, and other factors contribute to the 
development of inflammatory bowel diseases, celiac disease, and other digestive disorders. Liver 
diseases can be caused by infection, such as viral hepatitis; genetic mutations; autoimmune reactions; 
or drug toxicity. The rise in obesity in the United States has fueled a rise in nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease, which, like many liver diseases, can place individuals at higher risk for liver cancer. 
Good nutrition is essential for health and survival, and dietary factors affect risk for obesity, type 2 
diabetes, chronic kidney disease, fatty liver disease, and many other chronic diseases. Nutritional 
needs can vary depending on such factors as an individual’s underlying health conditions, and can 
change across the lifespan, from infancy to older adulthood. 
It has been estimated that 37 million U.S. adults have impaired kidney function—also called chronic 
kidney disease.
4 Kidney disease can lead to irreversible kidney failure and other life-threatening 
complications, and people with kidney failure require dialysis or a kidney transplant to live. Yet, kidney 
disease often has no symptoms in its early stages and can go undetected until it is very advanced. 
There are many different forms of kidney disease, including kidney disease related to diabetes or high 
blood pressure; inherited diseases such as polycystic kidney disease, congenital kidney disorders, and 
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; and immune-related kidney diseases. 
Urologic diseases and disorders include urinary incontinence and broad lower urinary tract dysfunction, 
benign prostatic hyperplasia (enlarged prostate), urinary tract infections, kidney stones, interstitial 
cystitis/bladder pain syndrome, chronic prostatitis/ chronic pelvic pain syndrome, and congenital 
urological disorders, among others. These conditions can be chronic and painful, and they may lead to 
substantial disability and impaired quality of life. Like many other diseases in NIDDK’s mission, urologic 
diseases and disorders are prevalent; for example, it is estimated that about 54 percent of women 20 
years and older report urinary incontinence in the past year.5 
Hematologic diseases within NIDDK’s mission include serious, debilitating, and painful diseases such 
as thrombocytopenia, sickle cell disease, the thalassemias, aplastic anemia, iron deficiency anemia, 
hemolytic anemias, and the anemia of inflammation or chronic disease. 
While the diseases and conditions within NIDDK’s mission affect different tissues, organs, or functions 
of the body, many are intimately linked. For example, obesity is a risk factor for fatty liver disease and 
type 2 diabetes; diabetes raises the risk for kidney disease; type 1 diabetes and celiac disease share 
genetic predisposition; and individuals with urologic pain syndromes often have irritable bowel 
syndrome. Many of the diseases and conditions within NIDDK’s mission have shared causes and 
contributors, for example, genetics, inflammation, and other biological factors, along with people’s life 
circumstances and their communities, e.g., access to care, environmental exposures, availability of 
healthy food or places to exercise, living in rural areas, and other external factors. As a result of the 
shared pathways to disease development, many individuals have more than one of these diseases and 
conditions.  
Vision 
Several principles guide NI

--- PAGE 6 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'Vision', 'mission'] ---
 
6 
foster exceptional research training and mentoring opportunities; and encourage knowledge 
dissemination through publication of research findings to help inform patients, families, and healthcare 
providers. 
Additionally, to fulfill our mission today and in the future, NIDDK is committed to supporting a 
multidisciplinary research community; engaging many stakeholders; and leveraging discoveries of 
connections among diseases across NIDDK’s mission to improve prevention and treatment— pursuing 
pathways to health for all. This theme is addressed throughout the Strategic Plan. 
 
Supporting a multidisciplinary research community: Through support of vigorous, multi-pronged 
research efforts, NIDDK strives to combat the many debilitating chronic diseases within its mission. 
Additionally, training and career development for researchers is critical to ensure an experienced 
workforce with people from different scientific backgrounds. Multidisciplinary research—combining the 
expertise and perspectives of researchers in a range of fields—is important for paving the way for 
groundbreaking insights and new, effective strategies to improve health. 
Engaging our many stakeholders: By engaging our stakeholder communities, we can ensure that 
biomedical research benefits all Americans. For the Strategic Plan, the term stakeholders broadly refers 
to those who share an interest in improving health and quality of life for people with diseases in our 
mission. These stakeholders include, for example: patients, caregivers, and patient advocates; people 
who participate in research; those who deliver interventions studied in clinical research, including 
healthcare systems, healthcare providers, and community and other organizations; entities such as 
industry that may move the results of NIDDK-supported basic research into later stages of therapeutic 
development; other federal agencies; and many others. Importantly, these individuals, organizations, 
communities, and others can all be partners in the research process. 
People living with diseases in NIDDK’s mission can provide valuable perspectives to inform research. It 
will also be important to engage with other stakeholders, such as community members who could 
partner with researchers in recruiting study participants and delivering an intervention to be studied in 
their communities. Additional stakeholders who could provide important perspectives include those who 
may be involved in the research continuum from foundational discoveries to clinical trials to 
dissemination and implementation of proven interventions in clinical and community settings.  
Pathways to health for all can be forged by leveraging the connections shared by the diseases across 
NIDDK’s mission, and by pursuing research avenues to benefit everyone. Many of these diseases have 
shared causes and contributors— including biological factors and community and other environmental 
factors. Additionally, many people have multiple chronic diseases and conditions in NIDDK’s mission. 
These connections also present valuable opportunities for improving prevention and treatment for 
multiple diseases. Finally, because the burden of many of the diseases across NIDDK’s mission differs 
for different individuals, it will be critical to bolster research that will improve health for everyone. 
Framework for the Strategic Plan for NIDDK Research  
The Strategic Plan highlights four overarching Scientific Goals. These align with the 

--- PAGE 7 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
7 
described above, including the theme of supporting a multidisciplinary workforce, engaging many 
stakeholders, and pursuing pathways to health for all. 
Scientific Goals 
• Advance understanding of biological pathways and environmental contributors to health and 
disease  
• Advance pivotal clinical studies and trials for prevention, treatment, and cures 
• Advance research to disseminate and implement evidence-based prevention strategies and 
treatments in clinics and community settings, to improve the health of all people, more rapidly and 
more effectively 
• Advance stakeholder engagement—including patients and other participants as true partners in 
research 
For each Scientific Goal, the Strategic Plan presents a set of broad Research Opportunities. The Goals 
and accompanying research opportunities will guide future research efforts to improve health and 
quality of life for people who have, or are at risk for, diseases and conditions across NIDDK’s mission. 
The Institute will also pursue new research opportunities and meet new challenges as they emerge in 
the coming years. 
Stewardship 
Serving as an efficient and effective steward of public resources is critical to all of NIDDK’s research, 
and the Strategic Plan highlights many facets of stewardship. The research opportunities described in 
the Strategic Plan will be pursued with the resources available to the Institute. Through careful planning 
and analysis, the Institute will meet the challenge of deploying its budgetary resources in the most 
effective and efficient ways to sustain research momentum, build on research achievements, and 
identify and pursue new scientific opportunities. 
Cross-cutting Topic 
Strengthening biomedical research workforce training is crucial to NIDDK’s mission and is addressed 
throughout the Strategic Plan: 
 
NIDDK Organization 
NIDDK is organized into several Divisions and Offices that work together to lead and support research 
to fulfill the Institute’s mission. 
Most of NIDDK’s resources support extramural research, including over 4,000 research grants, career 
development awards, and contracts each year. The majority of this research is conducted by scientists 
at universities and other medical research institutions, including small businesses, throughout the 
United States. A limited amount of research has leveraged special opportunities elsewhere, for 
example, to address important scientific questions relevant to our research mission that could be 
answered more readily in another part of the world. 
The NIDDK’s extramural research portfolio is directed by three programmatic Divisions that support 

--- PAGE 8 matched=['mission', 'Division of '] ---
 
8 
basic, clinical, and translational research, along with a fourth Division that coordinates and manages 
extramural activities. The Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolic Diseases supports 
research related to diabetes; obesity; cystic fibrosis and other genetic metabolic diseases; and thyroid, 
bone, and other endocrine diseases. The Division of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition supports 
research related to diseases of the esophagus, stomach, intestines, liver and biliary system, and 
pancreas, as well as research on obesity and nutrition. The Division of Kidney, Urologic, and 
Hematologic Diseases supports research related to diseases and disorders of the kidneys, urinary tract, 
and the blood and blood-forming organs. All three of these programmatic Divisions support research 
training and research career development, in addition to sponsoring scientific workshops and symposia. 
The Division of Extramural Activities provides leadership, oversight, tools, and guidance to help 
manage extramural program policies and operations, including the Institute’s scientific peer-review 
activities, grants management, committee management, and other efforts, including analysis and 
evaluation activities. 
The NIDDK’s Division of Intramural Research is composed of government scientists who conduct 
research across a broad spectrum of basic and clinical topics, along with research training, at its 
laboratories and clinical facilities in Bethesda, Maryland, and Phoenix, Arizona. 
The Office of the NIDDK Director coordinates efforts across the Institute and provides scientific and 
administrative leadership for the Institute. 
In planning for the future, NIDDK will continue to seek and value external input from its Advisory 
Council, the broader scientific community, patient advocates, other stakeholders, and the public. Active 
collaboration with other components of NIH, other federal agencies, and the private sector will also 
remain a cornerstone of NIDDK planning efforts. Ever-increasing knowledge and the advent of new 
technologies bring new scientific opportunities for alleviating and conquering the many chronic diseases 
within NIDDK's mission. The Institute will continue to seize and maximize new opportunities to reduce 
the burden of disease and improve health for all. 
 
 
 
1 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Diabetes Statistics Report. Atlanta, GA: HHS, 2020.  
2 CDC. National Center for Health Statistics Data Brief No. 360. and CDC. Prevalence of overweight, obesity, and severe obesity among 
children and adolescents aged 2–19 years: United States, 1963–1965 through 2017–2018. NCHS Health E-Stats. 2020.  
3 National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey and National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey, CDC.  
4 CDC. Chronic Kidney Disease in the United States, 2021. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention; 2021.  
5 Urological Diseases in America, 2018 Addendum. NIDDK, NIH Publication Number 12-7865, 2018.  
 
  

--- PAGE 9 matched=['Goal 1', 'mission'] ---
 
9 
SCIENTIFIC GOALS 
 
Scientific Goal 1 – 
Advance understanding of biological pathways and 
environmental contributors to health and disease 
 
“Basic” or “foundational” biomedical research includes the study of the biological principles, 
mechanisms, and processes that underlie how life works. By investigating these fundamental biological 
pathways as well as the environmental factors that affect health, foundational research lays the 
groundwork for new approaches to prevent, treat, and cure disease. The dedication of NIDDK-
supported researchers to expanding scientific understanding has led to life-changing medical 
breakthroughs and has opened exciting new research avenues toward further improving health. By 
pursuing the most compelling research opportunities, filling the gaps in knowledge in understudied 
areas, pursuing innovations in technology, and strengthening the scientific workforce, the NIDDK 
strives to build new pathways to health for all. 
Challenges: NIDDK’s mission covers a broad portfolio of diseases and conditions affecting many 
organs and cells in the body, and NIDDK-supported researchers continue to tackle the scientific 
challenges in these many fields. One overarching challenge is to expand our foundational knowledge of 
human variation and thus to increase our understanding of the heterogeneity of disease, e.g., why 
people differ in their risk for diseases, why even people with the same disease may experience different 
disease symptoms or severity, and why treatments may work well for some people but not others. Gaps 
exist in our knowledge of the links between biological and environmental factors affecting health. 
Understanding these factors will be crucial if we are to capitalize on the promise of personalized or 
precision medicine approaches for all. Increasingly, pursuing this research requires bringing together 
multidisciplinary expertise, cutting-edge technologies, and the ability to collect, analyze, and integrate 
data from various sources. Such integrated efforts are needed to fully uncover the trends and 
associations within increasingly large and complex data sets that can point the way to new medical 
advances. Connecting researchers with existing data, biosamples, and animal models to advance their 
work is also an ongoing challenge, with some repositories underutilized due to lack of available tools or 
training for users. Finally, collaboration with varied stakeholders is also needed to ensure that all voices 
are heard and that foundational research studies are asking the most important questions to address 
the needs of all Americans. 
Building on advances and discoveries: NIDDK’s previous research accomplishments have 
demonstrated how understanding the underlying biology of health can lead to scientific breakthroughs 
and real-world medical advances. NIDDK-supported studies have documented the rising incidence of 
both type 1 and type 2 diabetes in American youth. NIDDK has also supported the Accelerating 

--- PAGE 10 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission', 'research areas'] ---
 
10 
Medicines Partnership® program-Type 2 Diabetes, an innovative partnership among NIH, academic 
scientists, pharmaceutical companies, and non-profits which has developed a knowledge portal that 
shares vast, high-quality genetic and other data for studying diabetes and identifying potential 
therapeutic targets. This program recently expanded to other diseases, to become the Accelerating 
Medicines Partnership® program for Common Metabolic Diseases. Decades-long research into glucose 
management technology also laid the foundations for development of continuous glucose monitors and 
artificial pancreas systems for diabetes. Studying markers of disease risk, researchers found that 
elevated maternal blood glucose levels during pregnancy, even if not high enough to be diagnosed as 
gestational diabetes, increased the risk for adverse health outcomes in mother and child both at birth 
and years later. NIDDK-sponsored research has contributed to deciphering the important roles of the 
human microbiome, providing new understanding of diseases influenced by the gut microbiome, such 
as inflammatory bowel disease. 
 
Studies of various types of body fat tissue and how weight and appetite are regulated have shed light 
on the underlying mechanisms of obesity. Researchers studying kidney development and regeneration 
have highlighted possible targets for developing new kidney disease treatments. Other studies have 
advanced understanding of urinary tract infections and urinary stone disease, and have identified sub-
groups within and associated risk factors for complex urologic conditions such as chronic pelvic pain 
syndrome and lower urinary tract dysfunction, all of which may inform future research and therapeutic 
strategies. Research has also yielded new information on how blood cells mature and are renewed, 
knowledge that may have significant implications for blood transfusion technologies and treatment of 
hematological diseases. Several groups of NIDDK-supported scientists have also developed 
miniaturized laboratory models of the liver, kidney, intestine, and pancreas, as well as modifiable, 
miniature “organ-on-a-chip” experimental model platforms that are already accelerating research. 
These are only a handful of the many foundational discoveries that the NIDDK has supported. NIDDK 
will continue to build on previous discoveries while taking advantage of the opportunities in this 
Strategic Plan to drive further progress and innovation. 
 
Multidisciplinary Researchers, Many Stakeholders, Pathways to Health for All: Critical 
therapeutic advances are often made possible through foundational research discoveries of the 
complex connections among factors that affect health and disease, including biological processes, the 
physical environment, and other determinants of health. Understanding these interrelationships 
requires the collaboration of researchers with varied scientific backgrounds. From the fields of organ 
biology and genomics, to data science and artificial intelligence and bioinformatics, to clinical care, 
multidisciplinary teams bring together the expertise from multiple perspectives and life experiences to 
address the most urgent research questions. Sustained and fruitful collaboration between federal 
agencies, academic institutions, and industry is also crucial to share ideas, expand the scope of 
research studies, identify understudied research areas, and accelerate the path of discovery from the 
bench to th

--- PAGE 11 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission', 'research area'] ---
 
11 
 
Research Opportunities 
With the opportunities highlighted in this section of the Strategic Plan, NIDDK aims to promote health 
by enhancing fundamental understanding of the many biological processes and environmental factors 
that contribute to human health and the diseases across our mission. 
Research Opportunity 1.1: Identify and characterize factors that affect human health 
Identifying and characterizing genetic and molecular mechanisms of health and disease: New 
advances in clinical care require a strong foundation of detailed biological knowledge to tackle the 
many diseases and conditions within the NIDDK’s mission. Broadly, basic research studies provide this 
knowledge base by contributing to our understanding of how health is maintained in various parts of the 
body, how diseases develop, and how and why disorders progress. Linking genes and gene variants to 
the molecular processes they control, identifying the genes and proteins active or dormant during 
specific health or disease states, expanding our understanding of cell and organ development and 
function, and identifying disease-related differences between people of different sexes or ages are just 
a few areas that researchers should study within the NIDDK’s mission areas. By increasing our 
knowledge of fundamental body processes, basic research studies also provide clues to what factors 
can be leveraged to develop better prevention strategies, treatments, and cures for all people. 
Promoting interdisciplinary research into biological, environmental, and other factors that affect risk and 
progression of multiple diseases: The NIDDK continually seeks to maximize the value of its research 
efforts by emphasizing study of cross-cutting topics that are broadly applicable to many diseases and 
conditions within its mission. For example, researchers could pursue new insights into how the body’s 
organs, tissues, and cells signal each other to carry out their functions and how this biological 
communication is disrupted in disease or during physical or psychological stress. New information on 
how organs self-repair could lead to “regenerative medicine” approaches to restore lost organ function. 
The brain-body connection is also increasingly recognized as playing a bidirectional role in many 
diseases and conditions. Further studies are needed to fully understand how the brain and the 
autonomic nervous system connecting it to the body’s organs affect the function of—and sensations of 
pain in—organs s uch as the gut and the bladder. The lymphatic and immune systems also have 
multiple influences on health and disease, and research in these areas is also important. For example, 
researchers can gain critical knowledge through studies of the aberrant immune attacks and excessive 
inflammation associated with autoimmune and other types of diseases within NIDDK’s mission. Another 
factor associated with many diseases and conditions is the microbiome, which includes the numerous 
bacteria and other microbes in the gut and the male and female urogenital tract. Increased study of 
microbiome compositions and functions could have broad impacts on health. Biological pathways 
throughout the body are also affected by factors such as nutrition, physical activity, and day/night 
cycles (circadian rhythm); research in these areas can yield deeper insight into many diseases and 
point to effective interventions. How gene function is regulated under varied conditions is anot

--- PAGE 12 matched=['Goal 4'] ---
 
12 
Additional research into the regulation of proteins and other molecules will advance understanding of 
the communication between cells and the environment. Finally, there is a great need for foundational 
research that takes into account data on the physical and community environment. Adding 
consideration of these factors, where possible, into fundamental basic research may lead to a better 
understanding of how behavior, psychology, and the environment interact to affect health. 
Engaging stakeholders in basic research: Research volunteers help expand the reach and scope of 
basic research. Community partnerships can also provide a critical perspective and input for basic 
research planning. People living with a particular disease can give researchers unique “on the ground” 
insights into their experiences and priorities, which can lead to innovation and new discoveries; and 
they may also donate precious tissue and other biological samples to make critical discoveries 
possible. It is also important to engage with other stakeholders (e.g., other federal agencies, other NIH 
Institutes and Centers, the healthcare industry, foundations, patient advocacy groups, scientific 
societies, other non-governmental organizations, and others) who could collaborate in research efforts, 
play important roles in turning foundational discoveries into potential therapeutics and other 
interventions to improve health, and help pave the way toward future implementation. Stakeholder 
engagement is important for the other research opportunities in this Scientific Goal as well. (Additional 
information related to this topic is in Scientific Goal 4, which is focused on stakeholder engagement.)   
 
Research Opportunity 1.2: Analyze the links between biology, behavior, and aspects of 
the environment in which people live that contribute to disease heterogeneity 
Everyone’s health is unique. Varied genetic and biochemical predispositions, environmental exposures, 
behavioral patterns, and other factors all contribute to overall health via a complex interplay of 
mechanisms that are not yet fully understood. These unique variations can result in disease 
heterogeneity, in which people have different risks of developing a certain disease or experience 
different disease symptoms, progression rates, prognoses, or responses to treatment. Unraveling the 
complicated reasons behind disease heterogeneity could lead to more targeted and effective disease 
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment. 
 
Regenerative medicine: restoring tissue and organ function to improve health 
Some damaged tissues—including the gut lining, kidney, liver, and other organs of NIDDK 
interest—have a remarkable capacity to repair themselves. The field of “regenerative medicine” 
seeks to harness this process to restore cell, tissue, and organ function lost due to aging, 
damage, or disease. Understanding how and why cells and tissues regenerate, how adult stem 
cells contribute to tissue repair, and how to induce self-repair in damaged tissues could lead to 
new treatments or prevention strategies for inflammatory bowel disease, diabetes, kidney 
disease, liver failure, hematologic diseases, and many other diseases and conditions. For 
example, understanding how kidneys grow and repair themselves will be key to novel 
approaches to repair damaged kidneys or to engineer transplantable artificial kidney 
replacements. Studies characterizing the factors involved in intestinal stem cell he

--- PAGE 13 matched=['mission'] ---
 
13 
producing beta cells are damaged and how they can be protected or replaced could lead to 
better ways to treat, prevent, or even cure diabetes. 
 
Pursuing interdisciplinary research into how biological, behavioral, and environmental factors interact to 
affect human health: As NIDDK-supported research refines our knowledge of the individual biological, 
behavioral, and environmental factors affecting human health, there is a growing need to understand 
how these different influences interact to cause disease and its heterogeneity. For example, knowing 
that a biological process varies with factors such as stress, lower income, or exposure to pollutants can 
help refine research questions and reveal previously unrecognized connections between biological 
responses and the environment. Researchers can investigate many aspects of these connections. 
Some relevant questions may include: What combinations of factors cause good or poor health, and 
what biological mechanisms are involved? How do environmental exposures interact with a person’s 
genetic background to cause disease? What are the biological changes wrought by factors such as 
socioeconomic status or access to health-related resources? And, importantly, how can we harness 
this knowledge for precision medicine—personalizing treatment and prevention approaches for each 
individual—to improve health for all?  
These critically important questions cut across a variety of disease and clinical research specialties and 
require the expertise of collaborative, multidisciplinary teams. Such teams could spearhead holistic 
investigative approaches on topics such as how specific eating habits and dietary patterns combine 
with a person’s metabolism to affect disease risk; how diseases in NIDDK’s mission affect outcomes of 
other diseases (including the role of microbes in health and disease); how environmental, chemical, or 
other exposures can disrupt metabolic and organ function; how conditions such as stress, lower 
income, and access to resources affect a person’s microbiome, immune reactions, or brain-body 
interactions; and which epigenetic changes are important mediators between environmental factors and 
disease. Researchers can study these interrelated dynamics to gain deeper understanding that would 
enable precision health approaches to be developed for the “whole person”—including not just genetic 
and other biological predispositions, but also components of the communities in which individuals live 
and other aspects of their lives. 
 
Precision phenotyping: new windows into understanding health and disease 
Diabetes, kidney disease, digestive diseases, obesity, and other diseases and conditions 
within the NIDDK’s mission can progress differently depending on a person’s genes and 
metabolism and other biological, behavioral, and environmental factors that vary among 
individuals. Precision phenotyping—analyzing comprehensive, integrated information on 
these factors— could reveal new ways to detect, prevent, and treat disease. Information 
from precision phenotyping could answer questions such as who is at high risk for 
developing diabetes or its complications, how best to help a person lose excess weight, 
how various forms of chronic kidney disease differ, how rapidly kidney disease will progress 
in different people, and who will benefit from certain inflammatory bowel disease 
treatments. Wearable devices that track organ function or measure markers of disease 

--- PAGE 14 matched=['mission'] ---
 
14 
could help monitor disease progression and treatment success. A dditionally, enhanced 
phenotyping that includes characteristics of communities in which people live and work, 
which are often not measured, could help pinpoint how these factors contribute to disease. 
 
Research Opportunity 1.3: Develop innovative technologies and resources and expand 
data science to advance scientific progress and enhance health 
Basic research advances can lead not just to new ideas, treatments, and cures but also to improved 
techniques and tools that accelerate the pace of scientific discovery. Thus, the impact of foundational 
discoveries can ripple far into the future, opening novel fields of inquiry and shedding new light on 
existing research questions. Feeding this technological pipeline today with research to develop next-
generation tools will expand scientific horizons tomorrow. 
Promoting technological development to advance the search for new drugs, diagnostics, and devices: 
Advancing biomedical research and development technologies could lead to new treatments and 
interventions to help people across the lifespan. New advances in biochemistry, immunology, 
biophysics, and materials science are needed to accelerate the development of promising and 
potentially life-saving technologies such as artificial organs. Researchers can also design improved 
methods for screening promising therapeutic targets in the laboratory to enhance our ability to identify 
potential new drugs and thus shorten drug development times. Identifying and standardizing more 
biomarkers could provide safe, noninvasive ways to diagnose or measure progression of disease, and 
could make it easier to test the efficacy of new therapies in people. Improved biomarkers could also 
warn of possible health issues in the clinic by helping healthcare providers monitor currently difficult-to-
track health factors such as nutritional health, physical frailty, physical or psychological stress, or 
general metabolic health. Such tools could also provide physicians with valuable information on how to 
identify which personalized treatment approaches are right for which person. Finally, to deliver some of 
those personalized treatments to organs that are currently difficult to access, researchers can develop 
new gene therapy and drug delivery technologies. 
Developing and improving research technologies: Technical breakthroughs in laboratory procedures 
and tools can increase the scope, efficiency, and accuracy of research. For example, through advances 
in imaging technology, researchers could visualize and record data from under the microscope or within 
living people in unprecedented detail. Another area of opportunity is in the development of new 
research model systems. By generating new cell lines, animal models, organoids, and tissue- or organ-
on-a-chip systems that more accurately reflect human health and disease, researchers can enhance 
the relevance of basic research results and accelerate study in many NIDDK mission areas. New 
preclinical animal or tissue models of rare disease states could also aid in foundational research by 
providing novel insight into the function and disruption of biological pathways. For diseases that 
currently lack useful laboratory models, such advanced research tools could be game-changing, 
opening new areas of inquiry and promoting new advances. Researchers can also test their 
hypotheses in multiple model systems that accurately ref

--- PAGE 15 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
15 
Advancing data repository/biorepository science and management to enhance utility and user adoption: 
Resources such as data and biospecimen repositories are invaluable assets for maximizing the 
scientific value of donated biological samples and research data, and they provide excellent 
opportunities to enhance the study of diseases across NIDDK’s mission. Repositories allow centralized 
access to consolidated data and clinical samples from multiple research institutions, which can be 
critical to studies of diseases that are rare or are caused by a complex web of multiple factors. 
Repositories linking patient-reported data such as behavioral, psychosocial, and environmental factors 
with biological samples and data could greatly accelerate investigations into how all these factors affect 
health. Where repository resources are underutilized, there is a great need to identify and address the 
barriers hindering repository use, to implement best practices in repository organization and 
administration, and to improve repository navigation and analysis tools to facilitate research. It is also 
important to ensure that repository data and samples reflect groups with a high burden of diseases in 
NIDDK’s mission. (Additional discussion of biorepositories, along with data and biosample sharing and 
management, is in the Stewardship section.) 
Expanding the use of data science to improve foundational research: Through multidimensional studies 
linking large-scale proteomic, molecular, genomic, and psychosocial data with clinical, geographical, 
and environmental data, researchers can identify health-modifying factors and generate new 
knowledge of disease causes and contributors. However, unlocking the power of such “big data” often 
requires decoding the complex patterns and associations hidden within various streams of evidence. 
Thus, there is a need to recruit and integrate computational biologists and bioinformaticians into basic 
research to bring their expertise to bear on existing foundational research. Additionally, researchers can 
use new mathematical modeling, machine learning, and artificial intelligence approaches to facilitate 
analysis of complex data sets such as those available on cellular protein networks, disease mechanism 
pathways, and therapeutic target candidates. Finally, basic and clinical researchers can use data 
science advances to develop innovative, data-driven algorithms to implement precision medicine 
approaches, matching each person with appropriate medical recommendations. 
 
Research Opportunity 1.4: Strengthen the research investigator pipeline by enhancing 
workforce development and training of basic and translational investigators 
Advancing discovery and innovation requires a world-class research workforce with the varied training 
and experience needed to solve tomorrow’s complex and increasingly multidisciplinary research 
questions. 
Promoting and retaining a steady pool of new investigators: The NIDDK is committed to recruiting and 
training a steady stream of talented, innovative scientists. Expanded training and mentorship 
opportunities in basic/foundational and translational research are needed to achieve these goals. 
Recruiting the scientists of tomorrow can also start early— for example, with programs for high school 
and undergraduate students. (Additional information related to the research workforce is in the 
Stewardship section.) 
Facilitating interdisciplinary, multi-instituti

--- PAGE 16 matched=['research areas'] ---
 
16 
multidisciplinary teams. Through collaborations such as these, researchers can reduce the “siloing” of 
information and studies within their specific fields or institutions. Bringing together basic, clinical, 
translational, and population science researchers can also spark new ideas and allow the sharing of 
data, perspectives, skills, and resources. Input from physician-scientists (including surgeon scientists) 
can be particularly valuable in basic research, helping to bridge the gap between knowledge discovery 
and real-world clinical needs. Collaborations between the NIDDK and varied private, academic, and 
federal institutions can also broaden the Institute’s scientific reach to expand studies, develop new 
research partnerships, pursue new programs, and tackle multidisciplinary questions. 
Encouraging training in emerging research areas and cutting-edge technologies: Research training and 
career development opportunities are key to creating and maintaining a robust and flexible scientific 
workforce. As new research techniques and tools are developed, the research community should in 
parallel develop training opportunities for both early-stage and established investigators. One example 
is the current need for training in data science and artificial intelligence (e.g., bioinformatics, “big data” 
analysis) to help integrate these techniques into ongoing research projects. Additionally, training in 
cutting-edge techniques and technologies in areas such as bioengineering, imaging, genomics, 
proteomics, and social science can provide new tools applicable to the pursuit of a broad array of 
research studies. Overall, enhanced opportunities for hands-on career development training will help 
the scientific workforce remain nimble and ready to face emerging research challenges. 
 
Finding connections: the autonomic nervous system in health and disease 
The autonomic nervous system connects the brain to organs throughout the body. It also 
controls important involuntary functions. Digestion, for example, is regulated by the largest 
component of the autonomic nervous system— the enteric nervous system—that encases the 
gut. Damage to the autonomic nerves, such as from long-term diabetes, can affect the functions 
of the kidneys, digestive tract, and genitourinary system. One way NIDDK-supported researchers 
can better understand autonomic nerve damage and resulting organ dysfunction is by leveraging 
advances from NIH’s Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve Conditions (SPARC) program, 
which is generating maps of the autonomic nervous system along with other tools and 
technologies. Such tools would also aid research on diagnosis and treatment of disorders such 
as incontinence and diabetic kidney disease. Studies to develop and utilize cellular models of the 
autonomic nervous system, such as enteric nerves derived from intestinal stem cells, can also 
help advance our understanding of the molecular origins of disease. 
 
We envision a future in which expanded knowledge and novel discoveries of biological, 
environmental, and other contributors to health and disease lead to new prevention strategies, 
treatments, and cures for all people throughout our Nation who have, or are at risk for, diabetes and 
other endocrine and metabolic diseases; liver, intestinal, and other digestive diseases; nutritional 
disorders; obesity; and kidney, urologic, and hematologic diseases.  
  

--- PAGE 17 matched=['Goal 2', 'mission'] ---
 
17 
 
Scientific Goal 2 – 
Advance pivotal clinical studies and trials for prevention, 
treatment, and cures 
 
Clinical studies can deepen our understanding of human health and identify new ways to detect, 
diagnose, and reduce the chance of developing a disease. They can also determine whether a 
treatment is safe and effective, constituting a critical step in the journey from discovery to therapy. 
Indeed, clinical studies provide opportunities to improve the health of all people affected by some of the 
most common, chronic, costly, and consequential diseases. 
Challenges: There are many challenges that must be overcome to make clinical studies successful. 
Clinical trials that are testing or developing novel diagnostics, therapeutics, and prevention strategies 
can be immense undertakings. Furthermore, many diseases in NIDDK’s mission take years to develop, 
which makes prevention studies particularly difficult because the assessment of outcomes must be 
done over many years. As many of these diseases are also common, clinical studies need to recruit 
cohorts of participants from across the country so that the results are applicable to a vast array of 
people with different biological factors that affect health and who are from different areas and 
community environments. There are hurdles to recruitment, however, including costs, some people’s 
reluctance to volunteer for studies, challenges to reaching out effectively to different communities, and 
logistical burdens to both participants and researchers. Long-term follow-up studies present challenges 
as well, due to factors such as high costs and declining participant retention. Additionally, clinical 
studies require a well-trained, innovative, and sustainable workforce not only to design and conduct the 
study, but also to carry out other critical tasks such as participant recruitment, study coordination, and 
data analysis. Integrating constantly evolving technologies into clinical studies is also challenging. This 
is particularly pertinent to data science, where new tools and methods could enable more extensive 
analysis of vast amounts of data generated in large clinical studies, but training in this emerging field is 
needed. A further challenge is the costly and time-consuming process required to set up clinical 
studies. Mitigating costs, improving efficiency, and streamlining the clinical study set-up process require 
innovative approaches to enhance the infrastructure for clinical research. 
Building on advances and discoveries: The NIDDK has a rich history of supporting clinical studies and 
trials to understand and combat the diseases within its mission. These studies have provided critical 
evidence about which therapies yield the best results, and this research can also inform future studies 
to improve prevention and treatment strategies. For example, NIDDK-supported clinical trials have 
paved the way to U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval of a new artificial pancreas device for 
children and adults with type 1 diabetes. The NIDDK also established an international clinical trials 
network, TrialNet, that has been testing agents that have shown positive effects to slow progression 
toward clinically overt type 1 diabetes, such as a drug that slowed the progression to clinical type 1 
diabetes in individuals at high risk for the disease. In other research, the Restoring Insulin Secretion 
(RISE) Consortium has been testing ways to prevent the loss of insu

--- PAGE 18 matched=['Strategic \nPlan', 'mission'] ---
 
18 
high risk for type 2 diabetes or in early stages of the disease, and, along with other research, has 
shown that this disease is more difficult to treat in youth. Clinical trials have shown that in people with 
severe obesity, bariatric surgery resulted in substantial improvements in type 2 diabetes and blood 
pressure along with substantial weight loss. Other research showed that people ate more and gained 
more weight when eating ultra-processed foods. Studies of weight gain in pregnant women with obesity 
yielded findings that could inform calorie intake recommendations. Underscoring the many factors that 
can contribute to disease, scientists showed that a combination of clinical, genetic, and immunologic 
tests can be used to predict response to standard medical therapy for children with a form of 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). In recent NIDDK-supported clinical studies on liver disease, 
researchers in the Childhood Liver Disease Research Network (ChiLDReN) developed a screening 
strategy for earlier diagnosis of the liver disease biliary atresia in infants, with implications for earlier 
treatment, and identified a gene signature to help predict how quickly the disease will progress. 
Similarly, NIDDK-supported clinical research studies have identified genetic factors, circulating 
molecules, and physiological indicators in study participants that can help predict how quickly kidney 
function may decline, paving the way for more tailored healthcare strategies for kidney diseases. In 
other research, findings from studies of lower urinary tract symptoms have led to a more 
comprehensive subgrouping of people with these conditions based on symptom flares, knowledge that 
could lead to new strategies for managing this condition. 
These are only a few examples of NIDDK-supported clinical research. In charting future directions, 
NIDDK will build on the advances and discoveries that emerge from the opportunities in the Strategic 
Plan, to drive further progress and innovation.  
 
Multidisciplinary Researchers, Many Stakeholders, Pathways to Health for All: 
Technological advances have led to a time in which data-intensive science plays a central role in 
clinical studies, and researchers must increasingly traverse disciplinary boundaries to work on large 
collaborative projects such as population studies that aggregate data from many sources. Clinical 
studies require a talented workforce to serve as a wellspring of innovation, along with broad recruitment 
of participants from communities across the country so that the study results will be applicable to the 
entire population. Many of the diseases across NIDDK’s mission have common pathways with shared 
biological and environmental underpinnings; therefore, gaining a better grasp on how to best treat or 
prevent a disease may lead to new therapeutic approaches for others. 
 
Research Opportunities 
With the opportunities highlighted in the clinical studies section of the Strategic Plan, NIDDK aims to 
enhance and expedite the development of approaches to prevent, diagnose, manage, and treat 
diseases across our mission. 
Research Opportunity 2.1: Enhance the development and testing of diagnostics, 
therapeutics, and prevention strategies 
Strengthening the integration between basic and clinical research: It is important to build upon basic 
scientific discoveries by translating them into new therapies, diagnostics, devices, or medical 
procedures; thus, clinical studies c

--- PAGE 19 matched=['mission'] ---
 
19 
researchers can conduct translational research that moves basic research on markers of disease onset 
or progression into clinical studies to develop prevention or treatment strategies. Likewise, the results of 
clinical studies can spur further basic research by broadening our understanding of how some 
treatments work—and why they might not w ork for everyone. Researchers can also conduct bedside-
to-bench research on successful interventions to explore their mechanistic bases and expand their 
therapeutic potential. One important way to bridge basic and clinical research is to promote team 
science, with physician-scientists collaborating with basic researchers, data scientists, and others with 
complementary expertise. (See Research Opportunity 2.3 for further discussion.) Additionally, 
population studies will be important, for example, to gather data for prevention approaches. 
Furthermore, the development and optimization of clinical trials could be streamlined by conducting 
preclinical and clinical studies in parallel where appropriate, and integrating data from these studies in 
real time. 
Developing precision health approaches: Many of the diseases under NIDDK’s umbrella are 
heterogeneous—that is, they can affect people in different ways.  Treatment responses can vary from 
person to person, by sex, or among different age groups, for example. It is important to undertake 
clinical studies on the underpinnings of disease heterogeneity and translate that knowledge into clinical 
trials to aid the development of prevention or treatment approaches that are tailored to the individual. 
Preventing and treating diseases in children: It is important to increase focus on how to reduce risk and 
slow progression of chronic diseases that can develop at an early age, including studies to develop and 
test cost-effective disease prevention and treatment strategies for children and teens. In addition to 
improving health during childhood, these research avenues have the potential for health benefits 
throughout life. 
Making research participation and healthcare more feasible by using and improving technology: As 
home-based tools such as wearable devices for taking health, activity, and behavioral measurements 
have become more popular, researchers can undertake studies to improve how participants share 
health data. For example, these devices could provide a new way to monitor how nutrients, 
metabolites, and hormones fluctuate in the body over time. The integration of accurate, user-friendly, 
and convenient technological tools can significantly ease burdens on study participants, present a 
clearer picture of the participants’ health in real-world settings, and allow for the development of more 
personalized treatment approaches. Research must also address ways to optimize the use of these 
technologies and address the challenges to implementing them, such as lack of access, understanding, 
and acceptability. 
Improving study efficiency by examining several outcomes at once: Many of the chronic diseases and 
conditions under NIDDK’s mission are interrelated, such that many individuals have more than one of 
these diseases. For example, people with obesity are also at high risk for type 2 diabetes and the liver 
disease nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, and people with diabetes are at high risk for kidney disease. By 
looking at more than one outcome at once (e.g., progression of diabetes and kidney disease), 
researchers can gain i

--- PAGE 20 matched=['mission'] ---
 
20 
Incorporating innovative clinical trial designs: The structure of a clinical study can strongly influence its 
efficiency and the applicability of the results. In many cases, researchers can improve clinical studies 
by incorporating innovative trial designs. Examples of these would be adaptive design clinical trials 
(which allow researchers to modify aspects of the trial, such as treatment selection, based on 
accumulating study data), pragmatic trials (which would reveal outcomes more applicable to real-world 
settings), master protocol trials (which could bolster study efficiency by testing several therapies for one 
disease, or one therapy for several diseases), and stepped-wedge trials (in which an intervention is 
administered to all participants, but at different times). 
Developing ways to help people adhere to therapies they feel would be of benefit for their health: 
Adherence to therapy is important for controlling chronic conditions, treating acute or temporary 
conditions, and overall long-term health and well-being. Studies should be undertaken to understand 
heterogeneity among different individuals’ responses to adherence strategies and to test new ways to 
help patients adhere to treatments they would like to continue, such as the development of new tools to 
enhance or maintain communication between patients and their clinicians or other healthcare providers. 
 
Health at every age: improving chronic disease management across the lifespan 
Many chronic diseases in NIDDK’s mission manifest early in life and thus necessitate 
management throughout the lifespan. Even with advances in treatments, such as new 
technologies for glucose management, health outcomes may differ among different people. 
Thus, it is critical to improve chronic disease management to address individuals’ unique 
needs at different life stages. For example, adolescence remains a vulnerable time for people 
with chronic diseases such as diabetes, kidney disease, and inflammatory bowel disease. 
Clinical trials and population data will be important. Research could identify ways to optimize 
care for these and other chronic diseases across the lifespan, including as people move from 
pediatric to adult healthcare providers. Research could also lead to more precise ways to 
predict which individuals are at high risk for developing chronic diseases at different life 
stages, such as type 2 diabetes in youth, so that targeted prevention approaches could be 
developed and tested. 
 
Research Opportunity 2.2: Increase participation in clinical trials 
A vital component of clinical trials is making sure that the study participants include people who have 
the highest burden of disease and who could benefit most from the treatments, diagnostics, or 
preventative measures being tested. 
Developing more participant-centered research: Selection of an appropriate outcome measure is a key 
factor that affects the ultimate value of results from clinical studies, but what patients prioritize may 
sometimes differ from outcome measures selected by researchers and physicians. It is important that 
researchers include participant-centered outcomes, such as quality of life and other outcomes that are 
respectful to the participants’ values, needs, and concerns. This could help to build trust between 
research scientists and the broader community. 

--- PAGE 21 matched=['Goal 4', 'mission'] ---
 
21 
Promoting participant engagement: There are several hurdles to enrolling research participants from 
communities across the country, including a reluctance of some to volunteer for studies due to a lack of 
trust, and various burdens on research participants. Overcoming these challenges requires innovative 
outreach strategies, along with the development of infrastructure to assist investigators with strategies 
to cover unanticipated costs. For example, clinical researchers can reduce participants’ burden by 
utilizing community health centers in clinical studies, so that participants would not have to travel a 
great distance, could potentially attend study visits at times that would better fit their schedules, and 
could discuss the studies with their physician. Researchers should also partner with trusted 
organizations to document the life experiences of study participants. (Further discussion of participant 
and other stakeholder engagement is in Scientific Goal 4, which is focused on this topic.) 
Promoting pragmatic data collection: By incorporating ways to record health data in real-world settings 
(i.e., not in the controlled environment of a clinical trial), researchers could facilitate research in 
communities across the country and ease some of the burden on the participants (e.g., of traveling to a 
clinic). This approach could also result in a more accurate picture of study participants’ health. These 
measurements could be performed by the study participants themselves, and could include wearable 
devices (see Research Opportunity 2.1) or other tools to record health data, such as digital recorders 
for audio journal entries. Retrospective and prospective cohort studies utilizing electronic health records 
(EHRs, see section 2.4) could be carried out to gain insights into interventions tested in “real world” 
settings. It would also be important to train people in the use of these data collection technologies and 
to overcome the challenges of providing them to people facing different life circumstances. 
Research Opportunity 2.3: Bolster workforce development and training to increase and 
strengthen the pipeline of clinical investigators 
To ensure that NIDDK remains a leader in stimulating biomedical discovery, it is critical to promote and 
nurture an innovative and well-trained workforce to drive the clinical research necessary to tackle the 
diseases within NIDDK’s mission.  
Addressing the workforce pipeline at earlier career stages: As with other fields of science, the path to 
becoming a clinical researcher often begins with opportunities and choices early in one’s education. 
Thus, it is important to reach out early, such as through programs for high school and undergraduate 
students. 
Involving trainees in the design and implementation of clinical trials: Getting trainees more involved in 
designing and carrying out clinical trials would provide hands-on experience to help propel their careers 
in clinical research. Trainees would bring more perspectives and ideas to the research, and their 
involvement would bolster their competitiveness in their careers. 
Fostering interactions between clinical researchers and basic, behavioral, population, and public health 
researchers: It is important to encourage efforts that help graduate students and trainees in basic, 
behavioral, population, public health, or discovery science engage with the medical community, and 
medical students and trainees engage with the

--- PAGE 23 matched=['mission', 'research areas'] ---
 
23 
analysis tools and technologies could help to reach across different research areas. 
Developing and incorporating common data elements into clinical studies: Data elements, or 
information that describes a piece of data to be collected in a study (such as age or blood glucose 
level), are important components of clinical studies. Researchers can use common data elements 
(CDEs), or data elements that can be used in multiple clinical studies, for systematically collecting and 
analyzing information, and for ensuring that the collected data are high quality and are comparable 
across multiple studies. This would allow researchers to streamline data collection, investigate 
relationships between data from different studies, and increase the potential for reuse of their shared 
data to build upon research findings. NIH maintains a searchable repository that researchers can use to 
find, create, and share CDEs for clinical studies.  
 
Research Opportunity 2.5: Optimize clinical infrastructure and resources for clinical 
studies  
Promoting prospective cohort studies: A prospective cohort study follows over time groups of 
individuals who are alike in many ways but differ by a certain characteristic (for example, sleep 
duration) and compares them for a particular outcome (such as diabetes). Although they could be 
lengthy, prospective cohort studies are valuable because they allow observation of a large population 
over time and data collection at regular intervals, which investigators can use to answer many 
questions about the associations between risk factors and disease outcomes. These types of 
observational studies could be particularly valuable when studying the diseases in NIDDK’s mission, 
many of which develop slowly over a long period of time. Indeed, these kinds of studies have provided 
important and meaningful insights into the origins of disease, which, in turn, could lead to new ways to 
prevent and treat disease. Moreover, using different care settings in cohort studies, such as non-
academic centers and private practices, would allow for the generation of meaningful and useful real-
world data.  
Transitioning from initial observational studies to clinical trials for disease prevention and treatment: As 
noted above, observational studies provide valuable insight into the potential contributors to disease. 
Researchers should continue using the foundational knowledge gained from observational studies to 
design and test therapies—including behavioral, medical, surgical, and alternative therapies to prevent 
and treat disease— through clinical trials. Furthermore, observational studies are useful platforms to 
collect scientific data from participants in real-world settings (as opposed to the tightly controlled 
environments of typical clinical trials), which can then be used to design pragmatic clinical trials.  
Leveraging the research value of repositories: Repositories are an important component of scientific 
collaboration because they make data and biological samples from clinical studies available to other 
researchers. By establishing and using repositories, and by making it easier to find and access 
repository collections, researchers can ensure that datasets and biological samples are maintained and 
accessible even after a study ends. Repositories or databases can also link genomic, metabolomic, and 
other “omics” data to phenotypic data (i.e., data on presence or absence of a disease, hormone levels, 
ot

--- PAGE 24 matched=['mission'] ---
 
24 
ensure that repositories include data and samples from individuals and populations who have a higher 
prevalence or severity of disease. It would also be important to establish repositories for study fields 
that do not yet have any. (Additional discussion of data and repository management is in the 
Stewardship section.) 
 
Filling the gap: funding studies not supported by the private sector or other entities  
NIDDK is in a unique position to sponsor impactful clinical studies that are not likely to be supported by 
the pharmaceutical industry or other funders. There are opportunities to support research such as 
behavioral studies for treatment and prevention of obesity, kidney disease, or urological disorders; 
comparative effectiveness studies to determine the best available treatments for diabetes; and clinical 
trials that test the efficacy of existing generic drugs and devices as therapies for pancreatitis, liver 
disease, and other diseases and conditions under NIDDK’s mission. Other areas of research include 
studies that might not have a sufficiently large market size to attract attention of pharmaceutical 
companies, like studies that test precision medicine/precision health-based approaches for 
subpopulations of people with kidney disease or inflammatory bowel disease. These types of studies 
have the potential to identify new therapies or improve current treatment approaches to make them 
more effective and economical. 
 
Facilitating the start-up process for clinical studies: Clinical studies require potentially expensive and 
time-consuming efforts such as gaining regulatory approval to conduct the study, developing a 
participant recruitment plan, setting up quality control systems and data analysis tools, and bringing in 
people necessary to carry out these tasks. This clinical research infrastructure is usually developed on 
a study-by-study basis, resulting in the establishment of substantial resources that are subsequently 
disbanded after the study is completed. It would be beneficial to researchers if this set-up process were 
streamlined. For example, researchers could develop approaches for re-using existing infrastructures, 
with minimal changes as necessary, for additional clinical studies. Furthermore, researchers could 
establish an overarching infrastructure that incorporates features of both research networks and 
investigator-initiated studies, to facilitate resource sharing and rapid participant recruitment and follow-
up. 
Dealing with unanticipated challenges in real time: The COVID-19 pandemic challenged all aspects of 
the biomedical enterprise—from studies with  individuals facing other health conditions and difficult life 
circumstances, to the viability of investigators’ careers, to overall research progress. NIDDK engaged in 
a rapid, multifaceted response, including supporting COVID-19-related research and taking actions to 
reinvigorate research across the Institute’s mission. Lessons learned can help inform responses to 
future unanticipated challenges. Furthermore, researchers can leverage lessons learned to enhance 
research both during emergencies and more normal times, such as using remote labs, telemedicine for 
follow-up visits, and at-home data collection, to potentially reduce costs and lessen study burdens on 
participants. 
Prioritizing use of NIDDK resources in clinical research to complement, not duplicate, what is being 

--- PAGE 26 matched=['Goal 3', 'mission'] ---
 
26 
 
Scientific Goal 3 – 
Advance research to disseminate and implement evidence-
based prevention strategies and treatments in clinics and 
community settings, to improve the health of all people, more 
rapidly and more effectively 
 
As researchers find successful approaches to prevent or treat diseases within NIDDK’s mission, we can 
amplify the health benefits with research on developing strategies for disseminating the findings broadly 
and implementing evidence-based interventions in a range of real-world settings, to expand their reach. 
It is also imperative that we study how best to disseminate and implement evidence-based 
interventions for people in different communities across the country, so that our research benefits all. 
Challenges: There are substantial challenges, however, to dissemination and implementation, whether 
an intervention is clinic-, home-, or community-based. Because diseases in NIDDK’s mission are 
chronic, managing them requires continuous attention to medications, devices, and what may be a 
“new normal” of other changes to daily life. Treatment regimens can be difficult, time-consuming, and 
costly; and many people have the added burden of multiple chronic conditions. Some lifestyle 
approaches to prevention or treatment may be difficult to maintain outside the context of a clinical 
study. Some medications that worked in clinical trials are not used by as many people as would benefit, 
for reasons that may not be well understood and might vary for different individuals; and some have not 
been tested in as many people as would be optimal. Surgical interventions, including organ transplants 
and other procedures, may require long-term follow-up monitoring and treatment. Healthcare and 
community organizations may view even a highly effective intervention as too costly to implement, or as 
simply not compatible with their standard processes. Dissemination and implementation strategies 
need to be acceptable, accessible, and tailored to people who face different life circumstances (e.g., 
people of different ages, different socioeconomic conditions). An additional challenge in this area is to 
ensure a talented and trained research workforce, along with skilled and trusted people who could 
deliver an intervention effectively, long after the research study ends. 
Building on advances and discoveries: NIDDK’s previous accomplishments in this area demonstrate 
the importance and impact of dissemination and implementation research and can also inform future 
studies. For example, research has highlighted the value of approaches in different community settings 
for screening for and preventing type 2 diabetes. One such study adapted a lifestyle intervention to 
prevent type 2 diabetes based on the landmark Diabetes Prevention Program clinical trial; the findings 
led to a nation-wide program. Research on children who had liver transplants highlighted the need for 
additional implementation research efforts to help the children continue to take the medications needed 
to prevent the body from rejecting the life-saving transplanted liver. Other research demonstrated the 
benefits of artificial pancreas technology for people with type 1 diabetes as they lived their normal day-

--- PAGE 27 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
27 
to-day lives. NIDDK has also pursued administrative approaches to facilitate science, such as an 
accelerated grant review and award process, developed with others at NIH, that enabled time-sensitive 
evaluation of a variety of obesity-related policies and programs. In charting future directions, NIDDK will 
build on the advances and discoveries that emerge from the opportunities in the Strategic Plan, to drive 
further progress and innovation.  
 
Multidisciplinary Researchers, Many Stakeholders, Pathways to Health for All  
Dissemination and implementation research will require multidisciplinary approaches and collaboration 
among scientists with expertise in these areas, as well as expertise in intervention delivery and the 
diseases in NIDDK’s mission. Engaging a broad range of stakeholders will be critical—including those 
who could implement and disseminate evidence-based interventions in different settings, and those 
who would benefit from these interventions. Successful research efforts for one disease may yield 
insights that would be applicable to other diseases with related biological and environmental causes 
and contributors. 
Research Opportunities 
With the opportunities highlighted in the dissemination and implementation research section of the 
Strategic Plan, NIDDK aims to accelerate and expand the impact of evidence-based interventions for 
diseases across our mission, to improve health for all. 
Research Opportunity 3.1: Improve dissemination and implementation research, to 
accelerate the reach of prevention and treatment strategies proven successful in 
clinical trials 
A variety of factors can inform research on strategies to adapt, scale up, and spread an intervention 
shown to work in clinical trials. These include the nature of the intervention, characteristics of the study 
participants and broader populations who could benefit, and potential barriers and facilitators. 
Improving implementation research for different types of interventions: Some interventions for NIDDK 
diseases are developed for and evaluated in a particular population and setting, while others are 
designed as “one-size-fits-all.” Thus, research should focus both on broader, scalable, real-world 
implementation of tailored interventions, and on exploring strategies to adapt one-size-fits-all 
interventions for different settings and populations of adults and children. To boost the chances of 
effective implementation, researchers can test innovative strategies, such as multi-level approaches 
that link medical settings with other organizations (e.g., social services, housing) to treat the whole 
person; leverage telehealth and novel technologies (e.g., for implementing behavior change and other 
types of interventions); study stepped-care approaches (increasing treatment intensity if needed); glean 
insights from and partner with community groups; and pursue approaches that leverage peer support in 
community settings, among other strategies. 
Improving dissemination research strategies: For more effective dissemination of accurate information 
about NIDDK diseases and information based on evidence from rigorous clinical studies of 
interventions, researchers can tailor and personalize messages about risks and benefits to be 
understandable and meaningful to people and consistent with their values, so they can make their own 
health decisions. Researchers can also harness a range of cutting-edge technologies and social and 

--- PAGE 28 matched=['mission'] ---
 
28 
other media. Strategies could include partnering with stakeholders in communities and healthcare, and 
engaging experts in fields beyond the health and medical disciplines for new ideas to inform 
dissemination approaches that people would find to be helpful. 
Understanding the populations we want to reach and the challenges they face: To improve health 
across the country, researchers should identify and characterize populations who are not being 
reached with current intervention delivery strategies, including people who have not been sufficiently 
included in research. Such populations include, for example, people who live in rural areas; those with 
low socioeconomic status; individuals and communities with limited internet access; people of different 
ages, including older adults, and youth who may face life-long disease and unique challenges in 
treatment both during childhood and in the transition to adulthood; people who have multiple chronic 
conditions within NIDDK’s mission; and others. Researchers can then use this knowledge to improve 
dissemination and implementation strategies, for example, by addressing people’s perspectives and life 
experiences. 
Evaluating dissemination and implementation strategies: To ensure relevance of research results, it is 
critical for researchers to engage relevant stakeholders and recruit study participants who have or are 
at risk for the diseases that the intervention is designed to prevent or treat. By generating evidence as 
to what works and doesn’t for different people, this research can also increase trust in the applicability 
of scientific findings. Such efforts are important across the research continuum, not only in 
dissemination and implementation, but also at earlier stages of research, when developing and testing 
interventions in clinical trials. 
Advancing understanding of aspects of communities and other environmental factors that can impact 
health, both as causes of disease and as targets for intervention: To optimize research toward 
achieving health for all Americans, it is crucial to develop and evaluate strategies to mitigate the 
adverse effects of factors in communities where people live and work that contribute to health or 
disease, such as socioeconomic status, healthcare access and quality (as relevant to disease 
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment), and the “built environment” (e.g., types of food establishments 
and availability of healthy and affordable foods in a community, places to exercise). As an example of 
one research avenue, researchers can design strategies to help people compensate or adapt. In 
another approach, researchers can develop novel strategies that target these factors directly, to 
improve health. 
Addressing other barriers and challenges to widespread dissemination and implementation: In addition 
to mitigating factors described above, approaches are needed to address related challenges and other 
potential barriers. For example, researchers should identify and include appropriate and trusted people 
who could deliver the intervention to be implemented—both during the study and beyond. To inform 
study design, researchers should also identify individual preferences among those who would receive 
the intervention. Also needed is research to address the challenges of implementing a new intervention 
into existing healthcare systems, standard medical care practices, and reimbursement models. 
Widespread dissemination and implementa

--- PAGE 29 matched=['mission'] ---
 
29 
and scheduling flexibility; challenges experienced by those who are managing multiple chronic 
conditions; health literacy; the availability of understandable health information and resources; medical 
mistrust; different views among healthcare providers; and stigma faced by some people with diseases 
in NIDDK’s mission. Implementation strategies for behavioral interventions need to address 
neighborhood and community characteristics that may facilitate or impede healthy behavior change.  
Sustainability of dissemination and implementation: It is critical to incorporate sustainability as a feature 
of research design to enable the continuation of intervention delivery in healthcare or community 
settings over time, after the research project period has concluded. For example, strategies can use 
existing healthcare delivery systems and programs, public health mechanisms, or community 
partnerships (e.g., through community-based participatory research)—infrastructure and people already 
in place to sustain the efforts. Engaging stakeholders in the research will help identify what would be 
needed for sustainable implementation. Finally, for iterative learning and continuous improvement, 
dissemination and implementation efforts should build in mechanisms for stakeholders to obtain 
feedback on the effectiveness of their efforts.
  
 
Research Opportunity 3.2: Evaluate large health programs and policies initiated by 
communities and others (“natural experiments”) – research toward broader 
implementation 
Because the diseases in NIDDK’s mission place substantial burden on public health, many 
organizations, communities, and policymakers have pursued efforts toward disease prevention or 
management. For example, some policies and programs relate to expanding the availability of healthy 
foods (such as fruits and vegetables) or making neighborhoods more conducive to physical activity. 
These “natural experiments” provide valuable opportunities for researchers to learn what works in real-
world settings. Studies can evaluate the effects on health, determine why a program or policy may work 
in some communities but not others, identify unintended consequences, and explore whether or not 
everyone in a community is benefitting (e.g., people in different socioeconomic conditions). By including 
implementation science and stakeholder engagement in these studies, researchers can also bring to 
light the challenges and opportunities for disseminating and implementing promising efforts in other 
settings. 
When a program or policy is put in place with limited advance notice, it is important for researchers to 
initiate studies expeditiously. For example, there may be a time-sensitive opportunity to collect baseline 
data before the program or policy starts, for comparison when analyzing subsequent health outcomes 
and stakeholder perspectives. To facilitate such studies, NIDDK developed a flexible and rapid grant 
application review process for research related to obesity and other chronic diseases. 
 
Research Opportunity 3.3: Study major unanticipated events – toward future 
implementation of preparedness and response efforts 
Along with studies of planned efforts, researchers can gain critical insights from the study of 
unanticipated events—pandemics, natural disasters, and other crises. Such research could aid not only 
the recovery from the emergency at hand, but also the implementation of preparedness efforts and 

--- PAGE 30 matched=['mission'] ---
 
30 
responses to future events. Researchers should examine the impacts on health as related to diseases 
within NIDDK’s mission. These health impacts may arise from the crisis itself or from new barriers to 
standard care for NIDDK diseases. Implementing interventions for chronic disease is difficult in normal 
times, but in extraordinary times, the hurdles are even higher; thus, research could address these new 
challenges. Researchers can also evaluate the effects of community and healthcare responses to 
crises, and learn from what worked and what did not, and what the benefits or unintended 
consequences were. As an innovative way to enhance such efforts, researchers could participate in 
initial response teams to study the event itself, help with developing response strategies (such as 
modifications that may be needed to existing interventions due to crisis conditions, incorporation of 
telehealth and other technologies, etc.), and evaluate the effects of the response. Flexible and nimble 
grant mechanisms, noted above, can facilitate this avenue of research as well. 
 
Research Opportunity 3.4: Engage and partner with stakeholders in dissemination and 
implementation research 
As with other areas of research, dissemination and implementation research will benefit from enhancing 
engagement with multiple stakeholders: 
A range of stakeholders: Stakeholders include those involved in disseminating and implementing 
interventions, and those who would benefit. By engaging with stakeholders who would disseminate and 
implement evidence-based prevention strategies and treatments, researchers can learn what their 
priorities are and what is feasible for them (e.g., costs), and they can incorporate this information into 
research design and methods, and form partnerships. Depending on the intervention, these 
stakeholders may include healthcare systems, providers/clinicians, payors, state health departments, 
school districts, others involved in policy and payment decisions, digital health technology vendors, 
community leaders and organizations, federal partners, foundations, patient and professional 
organizations, and others. Similarly, by engaging with stakeholders whom an intervention is intended to 
benefit, researchers can assess the perspectives, values, preferences, priorities, and lived experiences 
of people with diseases in NIDDK’s mission, along with their views of treatment acceptability and 
feasibility—knowledge that would inform dissemination and implementation strategies.  These 
stakeholders include not only people with or at risk for diseases, but also families and other caregivers, 
patient advocacy groups, nonprofits, and others. For effective and impactful stakeholder engagement, it 
will be important to develop engagement approaches tailored to different groups and individuals, and 
actively involve them to help shape the research approaches and decisions that impact them. 
Stakeholder-researcher collaboration: Stakeholders should be viewed both as potential partners in 
investigator-initiated research ideas and also as initiators of dissemination and implementation efforts 
that investigators could join, bringing relevant expertise. To advance research collaboration, a 
repository could be developed to share information about evidence-based interventions that have 
potential for great benefit through efforts to expand their reach, and such a repository could also share 
information about dissemination and implem

--- PAGE 31 matched=['Goal 4', 'mission'] ---
 
31 
Educating stakeholders and researchers: To advance future studies, researchers can pursue 
educational efforts to enhance the participation of stakeholders in research and to help them 
understand how scientific research benefits health. Such efforts can also help stakeholders understand 
and use research findings, including new knowledge that may overturn previous views about disease 
causes or treatments. Educational efforts can be bidirectional; for example, those who have a disease 
can educate researchers about what is important to them and can help scientists better communicate 
the value of their research in grant applications and other venues. Patient advocacy and community-
based organizations can offer perspectives on meaningful communication with people who have 
diseases in NIDDK’s mission. Organizations of healthcare professionals can provide information on 
challenges encountered by practitioners in caring for their patients. Researchers can also gain ideas 
from experts in different fields and professions to inform these efforts. 
(Further discussion of stakeholder engagement is in Scientific Goal 4, which is focused on this topic.) 
 
A holistic approach to health: tackling chronic disease through multidisciplinary care 
Chronic diseases are prevalent across the country, particularly in areas that have few resources, and 
many people face the burden of multiple chronic conditions, such as diabetes, obesity, and kidney 
disease, as well as urologic and digestive diseases. It is critical to improve strategies for disseminating 
and implementing interventions so that people are equipped with information they trust and understand 
and with integrated treatment options that are feasible and sustainable within their life circumstances. 
For example, enhancing the interoperability and ethical sharing of electronic health data across multiple 
settings could help providers coordinate and improve treatment for people with kidney and other 
diseases. Multidisciplinary approaches to care could improve health of young people with liver or other 
organ transplants as they navigate the challenges of taking medications over the long-term to ensure 
transplant success. Innovative research to improve diabetes self-management could combine individual 
behavior change, family engagement, and strategies to address barriers within the healthcare system 
and other factors that influence health. 
 
 
Research Opportunity 3.5: Enhance the dissemination and implementation research 
workforce and multidisciplinary studies 
Dissemination and implementation research moving forward will require an innovative, trained 
workforce; multidisciplinary collaboration; and enhancements to study design. 
Invigorating the research workforce— research training: To promote a pipeline of scientists in 
dissemination and implementation research, training should include knowledge and methods for this 
field. In parallel, it will be valuable to train the next generation of scientists working in other stages of 
the research continuum—including basic and clinical research —to consider potential future 
dissemination and implementation of their research. Such training could inform the development of 
interventions that would be more amenable to future widespread adoption. 
To promote innovation, it will be important to recruit and retain people with different skills, perspectives, 
and expertise. These efforts will help bring talented, innovative people into re

--- PAGE 33 matched=['Goal 4', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
33 
 
Scientific Goal 4 – 
Advance stakeholder engagement—including patients  and 
other participants as true partners in research 
 
Sustained, meaningful input from people who have diseases within NIDDK’s mission and other 
stakeholders can have enormous value and benefit to biomedical research. Stakeholders should 
therefore be viewed as partners with researchers, including clinical and basic researchers (who may, 
for example, be studying biological samples donated by a research participant). Through engagement 
along the research continuum, stakeholders can provide a critical voice to help identify issues of 
greatest importance to them and give context to scientists to understand the perspectives and life 
experiences of those whom the research aims to benefit. Stakeholder engagement can also help 
ensure that clinical study cohorts reflect the people with the particular disease being studied, leading to 
research that effectively generates consequential results that can improve peoples’ lives. 
This section of the Strategic Plan focuses primarily on patients and other research participants, 
caregivers, and patient advocacy and community-based organizations. It is also important to engage 
other stakeholders as well, such as healthcare organizations who may deliver interventions tested in 
research, others involved in policy and payment decisions, industry, nonprofits, and other federal 
agencies. A range of stakeholders are addressed in the other Scientific Goals, along with discussion of 
the importance of stakeholder engagement in basic (foundational), clinical, and dissemination and 
implementation research. 
Challenges: There are numerous challenges to engaging a wide range of stakeholders. For example, 
outreach to individuals at higher risk for many diseases is essential, but hesitancy to participate and the 
need to build trust must be acknowledged and addressed. Scientists need to be educated about the 
value that patients bring to research to avoid missed opportunities for making findings more relevant to 
those with diseases within NIDDK’s mission. Importantly, practical issues, such as time and potential 
costs associated with research participation, and challenges to reaching out to remote communities, 
need to be addressed for effective engagement efforts. In addition, it is important to recognize that 
effective stakeholder engagement will require strategies tailored to different communities, rather than a 
“one size fits all” approach. 
Building on advances and discoveries: While stakeholder voices are becoming more widely recognized 
as critical for patient-centered research, few major studies to date have included stakeholder 
engagement. Notably, however, three NIDDK-supported studies— the Kidney Precision Medicine 
Project (KPMP), the APOL1 Long-term Kidney Transplantation Outcomes Research Network 
(APOLLO), and the Hemodialysis Opioid Prescription Effort (HOPE) consortium—have included patient 
voices at many stages of research design. For example, patients have served on leadership 
committees, provided valuable contributions to consent document development, and helped identify 
and address critical challenges such as insurance coverage for potential complications. Therefore, 
KPMP, APOLLO, and HOPE can serve as useful models of successful stakeholder engagement to 

--- PAGE 34 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
34 
build a foundation of best practices to benefit research across the broad range of diseases within 
NIDDK’s mission. 
 
Multidisciplinary Researchers, Many Stakeholders, Pathways to Health for All  
Stakeholder engagement is critical for advancing research that ultimately will lead to improved 
health for people with, or at risk for, diseases in NIDDK’s mission. By building trust and sustained 
relationships between the research community and many different stakeholders, NIDDK-supported 
research will better reflect, and subsequent findings will more likely improve, the health of people 
affected by these diseases. 
 
Research Opportunities 
With the opportunities highlighted in the stakeholder engagement section of the Strategic Plan, NIDDK 
aims to comprehensively engage stakeholders across the research continuum as true partners in 
research. 
Research Opportunity 4.1: Comprehensively involve stakeholders in each step of the 
research process, including patients, caregivers and family members, patient advocacy 
groups, and community-based organizations 
To maximize the benefit of research for those affected by diseases within NIDDK’s mission, stakeholder 
engagement must be promoted along the broad continuum of the research process. Potential 
opportunities for stakeholder engagement include, for example: providing input into priorities and goals 
for research, the design of research studies (such as studies that involve volunteers or analysis of 
human tissue samples or data), participant recruitment, and development of consent forms that are 
understandable and relevant to potential research volunteers; participating in conferences and 
workshops; participating in grant application review (where appropriate); helping to draft manuscripts 
and other reports describing study results; and providing input into dissemination of research findings. 
Such stakeholders would include patients and their families/caregivers and could also include 
organizations such as patient advocacy groups, community organizations, nonprofits, and others, 
where appropriate and applicable. Fostering training opportunities for researchers and stakeholders will 
enhance interactions and communication, leading to improved relationships between the two 
communities to help guide research efforts toward consequential results that can improve peoples’ 
lives. 
Stakeholders as leaders in clinical studies: Clinical research studies are often guided by committees 
that provide leadership, expertise, and oversight to ensure integrity of research design and safety for 
human participants. Stakeholders, such as patients and community members, would provide great 
value in leadership roles on steering committees; oversight committees, such as Data and Safety 
Monitoring Boards and Observational Study Monitoring Boards; External Expert Panels; and other 
committees. Furthermore, individual stakeholders would bring their own unique sets of skills, 
experiences, and expertise, which could ultimately improve the research process. 
Stakeholder engagement in research proposals: 
In grant proposals, including an explanation of how results from a proposed study will be meaningful 
and beneficial to patients, caregivers, and communities (similar to the Public Health Relevance 

--- PAGE 35 matched=['mission'] ---
 
35 
Statements currently in grant applications) may help researchers consider multiple stakeholder 
perspectives as they develop research proposals. Funding Opportunity Announcements could similarly 
request that research proposals include detailed plans for stakeholder engagement that would be 
relevant and meaningful. 
Partnering with stakeholder organizations: Patient advocacy organizations help elevate the voices of 
those living with different diseases, highlighting the needs and challenges that are the highest priorities 
of the people they represent. Partnering with these and other stakeholder organizations will improve 
research on diseases within NIDDK’s mission in myriad ways, such as helping to strengthen 
relationships with patient communities. For example, stakeholder organizations could assist 
researchers with participant recruitment and could aid in dissemination of research results broadly to 
those with the diseases being studied.  
 
Research Opportunity 4.2: Ensure stakeholders who engage in research include people 
affected by diseases in NIDDK’s mission 
Stakeholder engagement efforts must reflect people who are affected by the diseases being studied. 
Potential research participants, including people who might not be readily reached in healthcare 
settings, should be engaged in the variety of different settings in which they live. Engagement cannot 
be limited to recruitment of study participants; clinical research panels and committees, as described 
earlier, should also include community stakeholders affected by the particular disease. 
Promoting engagement of people with different perspectives and life experiences in clinical research: 
Research findings are most durable and implementable when research participation closely reflects 
those affected by the diseases being studied. It is therefore essential to promote engagement by many 
different individuals, such as people of different ages, from children to older adults; people who live in 
communities in different geographic regions, including rural areas; people with lower incomes and other 
socioeconomic disadvantages; and others.  
Building trust between scientists and communities affected by diseases in NIDDK’s mission: It is 
essential to build trust between scientists and the patient communities whose lives they endeavor to 
improve. For stakeholder engagement to be most effective, it will be important to develop strategies for 
reciprocal relationship-building, co-learning between communities, transparent and honest dialogue, 
and humility. Conducting stakeholder needs assessments, such as through partnerships with local 
sites, media, and community leaders, could be of great benefit to study design and to relationship-
building efforts. Furthermore, the relationships between researchers and patient communities can be 
strengthened by promoting sustained engagement, even after a particular study has completed, 
through consultation with study participants to determine their preferences of ways to keep in contact. 
Continued engagement would also facilitate broader implementation of research findings shown to be 
beneficial.  
Research Opportunity 4.3: Develop new ways to address barriers to stakeholder 
engagement 
For a variety of reasons, participating in clinical research can be challenging for some people. It is 
therefore critical to identify and reduce existing barriers to stakeholder engagement. For example, 

--- PAGE 36 matched=['Goal 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
 
36 
improved awareness of available research studies may broaden opportunities for participation. 
Flexibility in engagement would enable studies to accommodate the needs of research participants. It 
may also be helpful to identify new ways to improve the consent process and to review clinical study 
policies to identify any that may present unnecessary obstacles to participation. Addressing medical 
literacy may help tailor stakeholder engagement efforts and training. Additionally, for some diseases 
and conditions, potential research participants and the public may benefit from information about 
symptoms for which embarrassment is an issue (e.g., urinary incontinence). Strategies, tools, and 
resources could be developed to help investigators engage with stakeholders, such as surveys to 
receive real-time feedback from study participants about their experiences. Additionally, opportunities to 
help investigators learn from other stakeholder engagement efforts could be pursued. 
 
Logistical and practical challenges are often obstacles to research participation, so reducing existing 
burdens may help broaden stakeholder engagement. We must strive to identify practical ways that 
researchers can make involvement in the research process feasible for and appealing to stakeholders, 
such as minimization of up-front costs and addressing other financial issues, time, childcare logistics, 
addressing the needs of people with disabilities, and transportation needs. Additionally, the use of 
technologies may promote greater engagement with remote communities (e.g., web-based meetings, 
telemedicine). 
(Additional discussion of stakeholder engagement is in the other Scientific Goals of the Strategic Plan.) 
We envision a future in which stakeholders are true partners with researchers in the scientific 
research enterprise through meaningful, sustainable engagement, together striving to improve health 
for people who have, or are at risk for, diabetes and other endocrine and metabolic diseases; liver, 
intestinal, and other digestive diseases; nutritional disorders; obesity; and kidney, urologic, and 
hematologic diseases. 
 
Measuring progress toward achieving the 
Scientific Goals 
• Scientific Goal 1: Advance understanding of biological pathways and environmental contributors to 
health and disease. 
• Scientific Goal 2: Advance pivotal clinical studies and trials for prevention, treatment, and cures. 
• Scientific Goal 3: Advance research to disseminate and implement evidence-based prevention 
strategies and treatments in clinics and community settings, to improve the health of all people, 
more rapidly and more effectively. 
• Scientific Goal 4: Advance stakeholder engagement—including patients and other participants as 
true partners in research. 
For each of the Scientific Goals of the Strategic Plan—described in the preceding pages and listed 
above—NIDDK will assess and monitor progress toward achieving the Goals to respond to new 
challenges, identify areas for strengthening efforts, build on discoveries, and pursue emerging research 
opportunities. 

--- PAGE 37 matched=['mission'] ---
 
37 
For example, we will continue to analyze our research portfolio for existing gaps and potential 
opportunities. We will also identify advances in knowledge, prevention, and treatments resulting from 
research across our mission; evaluate the progress of large research efforts; monitor research training 
efforts; and assess stakeholder engagement. We will also explore methods to track research progress 
from initial discoveries to clinical studies of potential prevention or treatment strategies to 
implementation of findings in clinical practice or community settings, as such analyses could identify 
challenges and opportunities for further research. Additionally, we will continue to develop and enhance 
our analysis and assessment metrics and methods to address an evolving research landscape. As we 
pursue research efforts, we will also consider the unique challenges and opportunities associated with 
different diseases and related scientific areas. To inform research directions, NIDDK will continue to 
seek external input from our research and patient advocacy communities.   
 
   

--- PAGE 38 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
38 
STEWARDSHIP 
 
Serving as an Efficient and Effective Steward of Public 
Resources 
 
The NIDDK recognizes that careful stewardship of public resources is critical to all its efforts. Through 
thoughtful planning and analysis with input from a variety of stakeholders, NIDDK will deploy its 
resources in the most effective and efficient ways to support research along the spectrum of discovery 
to dissemination, provide information about research results, promote a talented and skilled biomedical 
research workforce, and prepare to tackle new challenges as they emerge. 
This section describes opportunities for a wide range of topics including workforce training and career 
development; rigor and reproducibility in research; partnerships; innovation; management and 
accountability; and other critical areas. 
Planning and Priority Setting 
Planning and priority setting approaches: NIDDK takes multiple approaches to research planning and 
priority setting to maximize the public investment in research and remain dynamic as science advances 
and new challenges and opportunities emerge. These strategic planning approaches include 
developing formal plans and reports, as well as internal planning processes led by staff across NIDDK’s 
scientific research programs. Planning and priority setting are also informed by burden of disease data; 
identification of research gaps, which may reflect understudied areas; scientific trends and new 
opportunities; research challenges; findings from evaluations of existing programs; and, importantly, 
input from the broader research community, people with diseases in the Institute’s mission, and others. 
Stakeholder input: NIDDK seeks stakeholder input through multiple venues, including advisory and 
coordinating committees, scientific meetings and workshops, meetings with professional societies and 
patient advocacy organizations, and public requests for information. NIDDK also reaches out to those 
with diseases/conditions in the Institute’s mission to hear about the priorities and perspectives of these 
communities and use this input to inform research efforts. The Institute works closely with other NIH 
Institutes, Centers, and Offices, as well as other agencies at the Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS). (Additional discussion of stakeholder engagement is in the Scientific Goals section.) 
NIDDK workforce for effective stewardship: NIDDK will strive to ensure Institute staff and those in 
leadership roles (both scientific and administrative) have expertise that reflects the research 
opportunities in the Strategic Plan and are committed to research to improve health of everyone 
affected by diseases within NIDDK’s mission. 
 
Multidisciplinary Researchers, Many Stakeholders, Pathways to Health for All  
Good scientific stewardship requires the attention and efforts of everyone involved in the biomedical 
research enterprise. The challenges are significant and varied; thus, a range of expertise, perspectives, 
experiences, and input is needed from NIDDK staff and leadership, researchers, stakeholders, and research 

--- PAGE 39 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
 
39 
participants. Working together, and ensuring that all voices are heard, we can ensure that public resources 
are administered wisely, public trust is protected, and health is achieved for all who have or are at risk for 
diseases in NIDDK’s mission. 
 
Scientific Stewardship – Opportunities 
With the opportunities highlighted in the Stewardship section of the Strategic Plan, NIDDK aims to 
promote efficient and effective ways to serve as a trusted steward of public resources and support 
research for diseases across our mission. 
For many of the topics below, additional information is presented in the Scientific Goals section of the 
Strategic Plan. 
 
Strengthen the Biomedical Research Workforce 
The NIDDK recognizes that the scientific challenges and opportunities within its mission require a 
workforce of individuals with a range of skills, perspectives, and creative approaches both within the 
Institute itself and in the broader extramural research community. Thus, intensified efforts and novel 
strategies are required. 
One approach to increase training would involve data science. Opportunities in data science could be 
implemented in rural communities and other communities with few existing resources, as extensive 
laboratory and medical research infrastructure would not be required. Another strategy to would be to 
increase partnerships with community colleges and less research-intensive institutions.  
Effective mentoring is critical for career advancement in biomedical research, particularly at early 
career stages; thus, another approach to improving the biomedical research workforce is to enhance 
mentoring programs. For example, one opportunity would be to strengthen engagement of NIDDK-
supported researchers in providing quality mentoring specifically to individuals in early career stages. 
The development of mentorship programs across institutions could increase the number of mentors. In 
addition to mentorship from more senior scientists, peer mentoring—both within and across 
institutions—can provide a valuable support network. Additional approaches to enhance mentoring are 
described in the section on research training and career development. 
 
Enhance Research Training and Career Development 
As discussed throughout this Plan, it is imperative to foster exceptional research training and mentoring 
opportunities to cultivate the next generation of scientists. The Institute supports the training and career 
development of medical and graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and physician/surgeon scientists 
through institutional and individual grants to extramural researchers and through its Intramural 
Research Program. NIDDK is committed to enhancing efforts to recruit and support talented individuals 
and to optimize their experiences and likelihood of success. 
The importance of mentorship to training and career development is paramount. Important avenues 
include increasing mentoring opportunities, including peer mentoring; training and incentivizing mentors 
at all stages of their careers; and evaluating mentoring programs to develop best practice resources. 
Additionally, by seeking input from next-generation researchers about their experiences and scientific 

--- PAGE 40 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission', 'research areas'] ---
 
40 
career goals, NIDDK will be able to build training and career development programs that better meet 
their needs. 
There are several transition points in research training and career development where talented trainees 
and early career scientists face significant challenges. By focusing efforts on these transition points, the 
Institute can mitigate these barriers. For example, NIDDK holds workshops for its career development 
awardees and new principal investigators to help these individuals advance their scientific careers. The 
Institute also emphasizes support of emerging scientific careers through special funding consideration 
for talented new and early-stage investigators. 
To promote broader research experience and build bridges across disciplines, NIDDK will encourage 
efforts to engage doctoral students in basic or discovery science with the medical community, and to 
engage medical students with the research community. NIDDK will also encourage recruitment of talent 
from varied scientific disciplines to the Institute’s research areas. As an additional approach, at earlier 
stages of education, programs linking undergraduate and high school students with research training 
opportunities in both foundational science and clinical research can help fuel interest in scientific 
research and spark new careers to strengthen the scientific workforce for years to come. (Other 
aspects of research training are described in the Scientific Goals sections of the Strategic Plan.) 
 
Attract and Retain Physician/Surgeon Scientists 
Physician/surgeon scientists are an essential part of the biomedical workforce; however, recent efforts 
have not yielded a steady, sustainable pool of early-stage researchers with medical degrees. As 
residency and medical fellowship training often provide limited time for research, many trainees 
interested in a career as a physician/surgeon scientist struggle to compete successfully for individual 
career development awards due to a lack of scientific publications and prior research experience. 
To counter this, NIDDK will foster the development of innovative approaches to strengthen efforts to 
attract and retain these individuals. Mentorship opportunities, as discussed in previous sections, are 
important for this group and need to be increased. Another consideration would be timing of research 
training and career development with respect to the structure of clinical/surgical training. Promoting 
team science, pairing physician/surgeon scientists with researchers with complementary expertise, 
could enhance comprehensive research design and foster a multidisciplinary research environment. 
Connecting physician/surgeon scientists with the growing field of data science could also help to attract 
and retain these individuals in research. Data science research can be woven into clinical training, and 
collaboration between clinical researchers and data scientists could enhance translation of big data into 
clinical application.  
 
Promote Innovation 
Creativity and innovation are hallmarks of biomedical research and drive improvements in health and 
healthcare. The ingenuity and problem-solving capabilities of individual investigators are crucial for 
research progress. NIDDK supports meritorious, investigator-initiated research that capitalizes on the 
ideas and expertise of scientists working in the NIDDK research mission. The Institute will continue to 
harness the creativity of individual scientis

--- PAGE 41 matched=['mission'] ---
 
41 
scientific directions for major scientific challenges, with the potential for broad impact. Pioneering 
solutions to complex biomedical research problems and engineering novel medical technologies also 
require the ingenuity of specialists from different fields working across disciplines and along the 
spectrum of basic, clinical, translational, and implementation science. NIDDK will seek ways to 
promote, support, and sustain multidisciplinary team science within its research mission. Additionally, 
NIDDK will continue to utilize the Small Business Innovation Research Program to stimulate 
technological innovation and increase small business participation in Federal research and 
development in NIDDK mission areas. NIDDK will also seek other ways to promote innovative and 
transformative research. 
Improve Rigor and Reproducibility in Research 
Scientific rigor is instrumental to the generation of data that is robust, and full transparency in reporting 
experimental details is essential so that others may reproduce and extend the findings. NIDDK will 
continue to support NIH policies and reporting guidelines to improve rigor and reproducibility in 
research, including implementation of a data sharing policy that requires researchers to plan for data 
management, preservation, and sharing.  
NIDDK will promote good experimental practices in the design, conduct, and analysis of research to 
ensure that conclusions are valid and reproducible. For example, standardization and harmonization of 
data and samples as they are collected, analyzed, and stored enhances their utility by allowing results 
to be compared across multiple studies. 
NIDDK will also promote approaches such as use of unique identifiers for datasets and reagents to 
allow unambiguous tracking of these across the scientific literature, standardization of metadata 
(additional information about scientific data, e.g., origin of the data, date the data were collected or 
generated, and methodology), and application of clinical research design principles to pre-clinical 
research. 
NIDDK will also continue to support resources to promote rigor and reproducibility and maximize 
investments in research. For example, the NIDDK Information Network, dkNET, promotes sharing of 
information among researchers; ensures that data and resources can easily be found, used, and re-
used; and provides services to promote transparency and reproducibility. 
Promote Data Science 
The complexity and volume of data generated by biomedical researchers offers numerous opportunities 
and challenges. To take advantage of these data, NIDDK, working with its NIH partners, must promote 
proper collection including use of data standardization methods and common data elements, storage, 
and sharing, as well as training efforts so that researchers are able to analyze and use the data to the 
fullest potential. 
It will be valuable to promote training in bioinformatics, biostatistics, and artificial intelligence (AI) 
approaches for the scientific community overall, as well as foster a talented data science-focused 
workforce. Additionally, increasing awareness of and access to bioinformatics and biostatistics tools, 
resources, and expertise could help NIDDK-funded researchers analyze their data successfully. 
Connecting data scientists with NIDDK researchers focused on diseases within the Institute’s mission 

--- PAGE 42 matched=['mission'] ---
 
42 
could encourage interdisciplinary relationships and promote innovation. 
Planning for data and biosample sharing and reuse should be part of a study’s design from the outset, 
to ensure standardized collection of data, metadata, and participant consent documentation alongside 
biospecimen collection. After a study’s goals are completed, making data and biosamples available for 
reuse should be an essential component of the lifecycle of a research project. (See also the 
Biorepositories section below.) 
Other data science opportunities are discussed in other sections of this Plan. 
Strengthen Biorepositories 
As discussed in the Scientific Goals section, biorepositories can increase the value of research 
investments by enabling reuse and novel analyses of previously collected data and biosamples. 
Repository management policies should maximize the reach of repository resources among the broad 
research community, such as by connecting repository data and samples with scientists who have 
innovative new ideas for their use, all done in a way that preserves participant privacy and that is 
respectful of the concerns of people impacted by diseases in NIDDK’s mission. To accomplish this, it 
would be important not only to promote the establishment and use of repositories, but also to make it 
easier to find and access their collections. Additionally, improved data repository navigation and 
analysis tools could make it easier for researchers to generate and test hypotheses. Where useful, data 
and biosampling standards for repositories should also be adopted so that archived resources can be 
compared across studies and can fit easily within a prospective repository user’s research. It will also 
be important to establish training for best practices, expectations, and opportunities for biorepository 
utilization for researchers, as well as enhance training in repository organization and administration. For 
example, the NIDDK Central Repository f
osters sharing of web- enabled data, biosample, and genetic 
repositories from many NIDDK-funded clinical studies with the broader scientific community. NIDDK will 
explore strategies to enhance and to increase use of these resources. 
 
Enhance Partnerships 
NIDDK partners with industry, academia, patient advocacy organizations, professional societies, 
community-based organizations, non-governmental organizations, and others to support and conduct 
biomedical research under the NIDDK mission. Each partner brings unique resources and strengths 
and the resulting synergy speeds progress toward common goals and reduces duplication of efforts. 
NIDDK will seek opportunities to collaborate and break down “silos” with its external partners; NIH 
Institutes, Centers, and Offices; and other agencies within HHS as well as other relevant agencies. 
 
Enhance Ability to Respond to Unanticipated Events 
NIDDK and the research community must be able to respond to unanticipated events such as 
pandemics, natural disasters, and other public health emergencies, not only in sustaining current 
research programs, but also in pivoting to new research questions and challenges. To enhance the 
Institute’s ability to act in these situations, NIDDK must be flexible and dynamic. It will be important to 
assess and learn from the effects of the strategies developed during the COVID-19 pandemic to help 
inform and improve flexible approaches to respond to these types of events in the future. 

--- PAGE 43 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'vision', 'mission'] ---
 
43 
Management and Accountability – Opportunities 
Enhance Use of Evidence/Data in Decision-Making 
The use of evidence and data to inform programmatic, operational, and policy decisions is critical to 
good stewardship. For example, NIDDK regularly reviews and evaluates its research and training 
programs and uses the resulting data to measure progress and inform decisions about future support 
and new directions. By enhancing efforts to generate data on research studies, research administration, 
and the scientific workforce, NIDDK will ensure judicious and transparent decision-making. 
Enhance Risk Management Practices 
NIDDK is committed to proactively identifying and managing risks that could jeopardize or impede the 
Institute’s mission and will continue to spearhead and collaborate with its NIH partners to improve 
processes and strategies for risk management. For example, the Institute will build tools for NIDDK staff 
to enhance identification and management of external and internal conflicts of interest. 
Reduce Administrative Burden 
Working with its NIH partners, NIDDK will continue efforts to optimize and streamline administrative 
processes and enhance efficiency while retaining quality and accountability. Reducing administrative 
burden for the scientific research community will enable scientists to spend more time on their research 
activities. NIDDK will also work to reduce administrative burden for its staff to harmonize efforts across 
the Institute, facilitate transparency, improve data quality to strengthen decision-making, foster 
nimbleness in response to emerging opportunities, and enable increased efficiency and effectiveness 
toward the NIDDK mission. 
 
Sharing Knowledge about Research Discoveries 
NIDDK will work with other NIH staff so that discoveries from NIDDK-supported research are shared 
with people who could use the knowledge to improve health, such as people who have or are at risk for 
diseases in our mission, caregivers, healthcare providers, and others.   
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE STRATEGIC 
PLANNING PROCESS 
In 2019, the NIDDK embarked on a process to develop the Institute-wide Strategic Plan, with a broad 
vision for accelerating research into the causes, treatment, and prevention of diseases and conditions 
under the NIDDK’s mission. This overarching NIDDK Strategic Plan complements our disease-specific 
planning efforts. 
 
2019-2021: Developing the Strategic Plan  
NIDDK presented an initial draft framework for the Plan to the Institute’s Advisory Council for input. 
NIDDK then established a Working Group of Council, comprising external scientists and patient 

--- PAGE 44 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
 
44 
advocates, along with NIDDK staff. The Working Group contributed ideas for research opportunities, 
the biomedical research workforce, stakeholder engagement, and effective stewardship of public 
resources. The Institute also invited broad external input with a public Request for Information (RFI) in 
2020. Based on input from the Working Group, the 2020 RFI, and NIDDK’s Advisory Council, the 
Institute prepared a first draft of the Strategic Plan, circulated it to the external Working Group members 
for comment, and then posted the draft on the web for public comment via another RFI in 2021. NIDDK 
then incorporated the input, provided the revised draft to the Working Group and the Advisory Council 
for review and then to the NIH Office of the Director.  The Strategic Plan was subsequently released to 
the public in December 2021. 
2025: Updates to the Strategic Plan 
In 2025, NIDDK reviewed the Strategic Plan and updated it to ensure alignment with the current 
Administration’s priorities and compliance with this Administration’s Executive Orders.  
 
 
 
ACCELERATING MEDICINES PARTNERSHIP and AMP are registered service marks of the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. 
 
 
 
