# NIGMS (2021-2025) — file: NIGMS_Strategic_Plan_2021-2025.pdf
# 24 pages matched priority-heading patterns


--- PAGE 1 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
1 
 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
 
Basic Discoveries for Better Health 
National Institute of General 
Medical Sciences 
5-Year Strategic Plan 
2021-2025 
May 2021 
Revised March 2025 to comply with all 
relevant Executive Orders  

--- PAGE 2 matched=['Goal 1', 'Objective 1', 'Scientific Priorit'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
2 
 
Table of Contents 
Message from the NIGMS Director .................................................................................. 4 
NIGMS Profile ................................................................................................................. 5 
Introduction .................................................................................................................... 7 
Mission Statement .......................................................................................................... 8 
Organizational Structure ................................................................................................. 8 
Cross-Cutting Themes ...................................................................................................... 9 
Scientific Priorities, Goals, and Objectives ..................................................................... 10 
 
Goal 1: Sustain Strong Support for Investigator-Initiated Research .......................... 10 
Objective 1‐1: Invest in and sustain a portfolio of highly meritorious fundamental biomedical research.
 ............................................................................................................................................................. 10 
Objective 1‐2: Promote the ability of individual investigators to pursue new research directions, novel 
scientific insights, and innovative ideas. .............................................................................................. 11 
 
Goal 2: Invest in the Development of a Skilled 21st Century Biomedical Research 
Workforce .............................................................................................................. 12 
Objective 2‐1: Support highly effective, evidence-informed research training at all stages of the 
biomedical research training and career development pathway......................................................... 12 
Objective 2‐2: Promote and enable the enhanced utilization of data in the development, assessment, 
and pursuit of research training outcomes. ......................................................................................... 13 
 
Goal 3: Enhance Research Capacity and Enable Access to Critical Research Resources
 .............................................................................................................................. 14 
Objective 3‐1: Support access to essential research resources and the development of new technologies 
that enable novel scientific advances. ................................................................................................. 15 
Objective 3‐2: Catalyze the development of institutional research capacities, particularly in traditionally 
underserved states, regions, communities, and institutions. ............................................................... 16 
 
Serving as an Efficient and Effective Steward of Public Resources .................................. 18 
 
Goal 4: Advance the Public’s Understanding of NIGMS-Supported Research, Training, 
and Capacity Building Programs and the Critical Role of Basic Biomedical Research. 18 
Objective 4‐1: Leverage a broad range of outreach approaches and resources to disseminate accurate, 
timely, and clear information about NIGMS goals, activities, results, and returns on investment to the 
public. ...........................................................................................

--- PAGE 3 matched=['Objective 5', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
3 
 
Objective 5‐3: Enhance the collection, analysis, and utilization of data to iteratively assess, evaluate, and 
optimize NIGMS operations. ................................................................................................................ 20 
Objective 5‐4: Continue to enhance and evolve NIGMS information systems, technologies, and related 
infrastructures to ensure maximal security and utility. ....................................................................... 21 
Objective 5‐5: Develop and optimize cooperative and synergistic partnerships with other NIH institutes 
and centers, other federal agencies, and other organizations. ............................................................ 22 
 
Priority Setting ....................................................................................................... 23 
 
Closing ................................................................................................................... 23 
 
Description of Strategic Plan Development Process ....................................................... 23 
Development and Dissemination of 2021-2025 Strategic Plan Framework ............... 23 
Development and Dissemination of the Final 2021-2025 Strategic Plan ................... 23 
 
  

--- PAGE 4 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'goals and objectives', 'vision'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
4 
 
Message from the NIGMS Director 
I am pleased to present the 2021-2025 National Institute of 
General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) strategic plan. This forward-
looking document reflects the Institute’s priorities and activities 
in pursuit of its mission  and builds upon the successes of the 
Institute’s prior strategic plan. It lays out the goals, objectives , 
and implementation strategies that the Institute —in 
partnership with the scientific community at extramural 
research institutions , professional societies , and other federal 
agencies—will engage in over the next 5 years. It also provides 
snapshots of specific priorities and associated targets to ensure 
that the Institute demonstrates transparency in the pursuit of 
its goals and objectives.  
 
NIGMS-funded scientists investigate how living systems work at 
a range of levels, from molecules and cells to tissues, whole organisms , and populations. 
Investments in these diverse and fundamental areas of biomedical research serve as the 
foundation for subsequent disease- and organ-specific discoveries and advances. Our ability 
to effectively treat, diagnose, manage , and ultimately cure diseases requires an 
understanding of their underlying mechanisms and biology. For example, the outcomes of 
NIGMS’ investments in fundamental biomedical research have resulted in 90 Nobel prizes—
47 in chemistry and 43 in physiology or medicine. 
 
NIGMS was established in 1962 with a $124.6 million budget (Pub. L. 87-838, 76 Stat. 1072). In 
Fiscal Year (FY) 2020, the Institute’s budget was $2.9 billion. Most of this appropriation goes 
into local economies through grants t hat support  individual investigators and trainees at 
universities, medical schools, hospitals , and other research institutions throughout the 
country. NIGMS takes its role as a steward of taxpayer dollars very seriously and thus works 
to invest its resources in a manner that maximizes scientific impact and productivity,  safety, 
efficiency, transparency, and accountability.  
 
As indicated in this strategic plan, the Institute places great emphasis on supporting a wide 
range of investigator-initiated research grants that unleash the creativity and energy of 
investigators across the country to solve important biomedical problems. A key tenet of the 
Institute’s vision is that by supporting a broad and diverse portfolio of scientific topics, 
approaches, investigators , and institutions, we maximize the opportunities for 
breakthroughs and build the strongest foundation possible on which future advances in 
medical practice will be built. An important part of achieving this goal is to support the next 
generation of scientists, who will conduct the breakthrough work of the future. D ue in part 
to the successful introduction of the R35 Maximizing Investigators’ Research Award (MIRA) 
grant mechanism in FY 2016, the number of new research project grants awarded by NIGMS 
to early stage investigators (ESIs) increased from 128 in FY 2015 to 264 in FY 2020.  
Jon R. Lorsch, Ph.D.  
Director, NIGMS 

--- PAGE 5 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
5 
 
 
NIGMS research training programs are built upon recognition of the interdisciplinary nature 
of biomedical research and thus emphasize experiences that cut across multiple fields of 
inquiry.  
 
Certain NIGMS training programs address areas in which there are critical needs  such as 
effective mentorship. Other programs aim to strengthen the research process by engaging 
individuals from different scientific disciplines and skills earlier along the biomedical career 
pathway. 
 
In addition, the Institute provides funding to research centers that support critical research 
resources used by the scientific community or that build research capacities in states that 
have historically received lower levels of NIH funding. In all its investments, and in line with 
agency-wide efforts, NIGMS continues to stress the critical importance of rigor, 
reproducibility, and transparency in all biomedical pursuits. 
 
As NIGMS continues its work over the next 5 years, it does so with an ongoing commitment 
to public service, the careful stewardship of taxpayer funds , and a focus on achieving 
important outcomes such as those documented in this strategic plan. Recognizing that the 
achievement of such outcomes cannot occur in isolation, NIGMS maintains its commitment 
to pursue its mission in an atmosphere of open dialogue, collaboration , and shared 
responsibility with the scientific community and general public. 
Jon R. Lorsch, Ph.D.  
Director 
National Institute of General Medical Sciences  
National Institutes of Health 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
NIGMS Profile 
 
 
NIGMS Profile 
Year Established 1962 
FY 2020 Budget $2.9 billion 
FY 2020 Supported Investigators >5,500  

--- PAGE 6 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
6 
 
FY 2020 Newly Funded  
Early Stage Investigators 
264 
FY 2020 Funded Research Grants > 4,500 
FY 2020 National Research Service Award-
Supported Trainees 
>4,000 
Number of Grantees Who Have Won Nobel 
Prizes Since 1962 
90 
 
Divisions 
 
• Biophysics, Biomedical Technology, and Computational Biosciences 
• Data Integration, Modeling, and Analytics 
• Extramural Activities 
• Genetics and Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology 
• Management 
• Pharmacology, Physiology, and Biological Chemistry 
• Research Capacity Building 
• Training and Workforce Development 
 
  

--- PAGE 7 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
7 
 
Introduction 
Established in 1962, t he National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) is a 
component of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS). NIGMS supports fundamental biomedical research —defining the 
mechanisms of how biological systems work , which serves as the foundation for 
advancements in nearly every area of medicine and public health. Thus, NIGMS-supported 
research remains a critical driver of both scientific discovery and the U.S. economy. Keeping 
the biomedical research enterprise healthy and flowing requires supporting a broad  and 
diverse scientific research and training portfolio. NIGMS prides itself as a n efficient, 
productive, and accountable  steward of taxpayer funds , particularly  in sustaining 
investigator-initiated, fundamental biomedical research ; training the next generation of 
scientists; developing institutional research capacities ; and supporting robust research 
resources to meet the needs of the 21st century biomedical research enterprise.  
 
NIGMS uses four major means to advance its mission: 
• Awarding grants that support scientific research at colleges, universities, medical 
schools, research institutes, and small businesses in areas directly relevant to the NIGMS 
mission. This effort includes promoting the ability of a broad range of individual 
investigators to pursue new research directions, novel scientific insights, and innovative 
ideas to optimize the likelihood of making important scientific discoveries and advances.  
• Supporting training and education awards that promote the development of a skilled and 
talented biomedical research workforce. 
• Administering p rograms that support the development of, and widespread access to, 
high‐quality research resources and technologies that  are essential for research 
advances. 
• Building biomedical research  capacity in under ‐resourced institutions , regions,  and 
states. 
 
Through these activities, NIGMS plays a major role in advancing fundamental biomedical 
research and maintaining a healthy research enterprise in every state in the nation as well 
as in U.S. territories. 
The NIGMS 2021-2025 strategic plan is a management tool that will be used by the Institute 
to guide the efficient and effective use of taxpayer funds to extend the reach of fundamental 
scientific knowledge to meet the challenges of a rapidly evolving biomedical research 
landscape. 
  

--- PAGE 8 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'Mission'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
8 
 
Mission Statement 
NIGMS supports basic research that increases our understanding of biological processes and 
lays the foundation for advances in disease diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. NIGMS 
also supports research in specific clinical areas that affect multiple organ syste ms: 
anesthesiology and peri -operative pain; clinical pharmacology common to multiple drugs 
and treatments; and injury, critical illness, sepsis, and wound healing. NIGMS -funded 
scientists investigate how living systems work at a range of levels—from molecules and cells 
to tissues and organs —in research organisms, humans, and populations. Additionally, to 
ensure the vitality and continued productivity of the research enterprise, NIGMS provides 
leadership in supporting the training of the next generation of s cientists and developing 
research capacity throughout the country. 
Organizational Structure 
NIGMS is organized into divisions that support research and research training in a range of 
scientific fields . In the organizational chart below, m anagement and administration 
components of the Institute are depicted in black and yellow, scientific divisions in blue, and 
grants administration in green. The disciplines and areas in which the scientific divisions fund 
research are also indicated.  
 
Full descriptions of NIGMS’ divisions can be found on the NIGMS organization and staff webpage. 
  

--- PAGE 9 matched=['Cross-Cutting Theme', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
9 
 
Cross-Cutting Themes 
Several aspects of NIGMS’ mission are not unique to any one goal or objective contained in 
this strategic plan. Thus, NIGMS has identified key cross-cutting themes that span multiple 
aspects of the Institute’s mission and operations.  
 
Evaluating and Iteratively Optimizing NIGMS Programs and Portfolios 
Through Data  
 
Regularly performing analyses that support the effective administration of programs ensures 
the efficient stewardship of taxpayer resources. Application of this principle is a central tenet 
of NIGMS operations, as the Institute continues to support multiple types of programmatic 
analyses (e.g., portfolio, descriptive, predictive) and evaluations (e.g., outcomes, process, 
needs-based) that inform program and business process improvements and enhancements. 
Analyses include activities such as data modeling that uses descriptive data as a baseline for 
better, more accurate predictive analytical models of program function as well as  financial 
forecasting. Commensurate with the principles of the Foundations for Evidence -Based 
Policymaking Act , the results of evaluations of NIGMS programs and the ensuing actions 
taken in response to their findings have been publicly posted. These efforts provide robust, 
timely, contextually  appropriate data and other information that promote organizational 
efficiency, transparency, and stewardship of public resources. 
Over the next 5 years, NIGMS will continue to enhance its ability to collect and analyze data 
related to its programs , initiatives, and business processes . The measurement of program 
performance is a continuing challenge , given the many goals of differing grant programs 
(e.g., funding scientific activities, provisioning research infrastructure, training students), 
multiple stakeholders for every program, and a mix of quantitative and qualitative  data 
collected over time. NIGMS will enhance efforts to strengthen its collection and analysis of 
data regarding program performance  as well as expand the  breadth of its data sources, 
analytic expertise, and in-house evaluative capacity.  In this regard, in FY 2020, NIGMS 
reorganized its structure to elevate the former Office of Pro gram Planning, Analysis , and 
Evaluation to a full division: the Division of Data Integration, Modeling, and Analytics. 
 
Transparency and Communication 
 
Robust strategies in transparency and communication are crucial  to the success of NIGMS’ 
mission and scientific discovery. NIGMS employs a variety of communication strategies to 
facilitate a reciprocal dialogue with its stakeholders and the general public , including live 
broadcasts of the National Advisory General Medical Sciences Council open sessions, training 
webinars, requests for information (RFIs), social media , online blogs, presentations at 
conferences, and meetings with professional societies.  Moreover, the findings of NIGMS’ 
reports and program evaluations, and the Institute’s actions taken in response to them, are 
routinely posted on the NIGMS evaluation website. Through these varied methods, NIGMS 

--- PAGE 10 matched=['Goal 1', 'Objective 1', 'Scientific Priorit'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
10 
 
continues to proactively engage its stakeholders with transparency, accountability, and to 
broaden the public’s understanding of NIGMS-funded scientific activities.  
 
 
Scientific Priorities, Goals, and Objectives 
Targets are exemplars and not inclusive of all NIGMS activities 
(Unless otherwise indicated, targets will be completed by 2025) 
Goal 1: Sustain Strong Support for Investigator-Initiated Research 
Because scientific discoveries and technological breakthroughs usually come from 
unexpected directions and are built on foundations of knowledge produced by many 
researchers over decades, supporting a broad scientific portfolio of fundamental, 
investigator-initiated research is critical for future advances in biomedicine and is central to 
NIGMS’ mission. The Institute will continue to prioritize this aspect of its research portfolio 
over the next 5 years. 
Objective 1‐1: Invest in and sustain a portfolio of highly meritorious fundamental biomedical 
research. 
To maximize scientific opportunity  and discovery , NIGMS will continue to prioritize its 
support of investigator-initiated research through a variety of grant mechanisms , including 
collaborative team science, for studies of complex biomedical problems. NIGMS also 
recognizes that early  stage investigators (ESIs) are a critical component of scientific 
creativity, and support for ESIs continues to remain an Institute priority . These efforts will 
shape and continually evolve a robust and productive biomedical research portfolio.  
 
Implementation Strategies:  
1. Prioritize funding for meritorious early career and other at -risk investigators (i.e., 
those who otherwise would not have significant research support). 
 
Target:  
a. Meet or exceed NIH Next Generation Researchers Initiative targets yearly.  
 
2. Continually assess and optimize the efficacy, distribution (e.g., scientific, 
geographic, institutional), and impact of NIGMS investments by conducting regular 
portfolio analyses and periodic evaluations of each Institute program. 
 
Targets:  
a. Ensure that at least 30% of NIGMS programs have been evaluated in the past 
5 years. 
b. Post a ll outcomes assessments and program evaluations on the NIGMS 
website, along with descriptions of any changes made to the programs based 

--- PAGE 11 matched=['Objective 1', 'Strategic Plan', 'research areas'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
11 
 
on the findings. 
 
3. Actively assess funding distribution to optimize the scientific productivity and 
impact of the NIGMS portfolio. 
 
Target: 
a. Annually assess and publish NIGMS’ scientific funding trends through  the 
NIGMS Feedback Loop blog. 
 
4. Encourage robust research collaborations among multidisciplinary teams of 
investigators through initiatives and activities that promote team science. 
 
Targets:  
a. Fund at least two new team science (RM1) grants or other awards aimed at 
fostering team science per year.  
b. Develop or participate in at least one new partnership with another federal 
agency or external organization to encourage collaborations between 
biomedical researchers and scientists, engineers, and/or other 
professionals in fields outside of biomedical research.   
 
5. Assess the Institute’s clinical research programs and use the results to ensure these 
programs are optimally focused to promote rapid progress toward improved clinical 
outcomes. 
 
Targets: 
a. Complete assessment of non-sepsis clinical areas. 
b. Support at least one partnership with another NIH institute or center related 
to one or more of NIGMS’ clinical research areas. 
c. Launch and/or participate in at least three initiatives related to women’s 
health and/or health disparities. 
 
Objective 1 ‐2: Promote the ability of individual investigators to pursue new research 
directions, novel scientific insights, and innovative ideas. 
Biomedical research is a dynamic enterprise that creates opportunities to explore new ideas 
and paradigms while questioning established ones. NIGMS will continue to utilize and 
expand the MIRA grant mechanism , initially launched as a pilot in 2015, to provide 
investigators with the flexibility to pursue new research directions as they arise  while 
simultaneously enhancing the stability of overall support and reducing administrative 
burden. MIRA also helps distribute funding broadly among the nation's highly talented and 
promising investigators, including ESIs.  
 
Implementation Strategies: 
1. Continue to assess, expand, and enhance NIGMS’ MIRA program to ensure that it is 

--- PAGE 12 matched=['Goal 2', 'Objective 2', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
12 
 
meeting its intended objectives of promoting creative and ambitious research.  
 
Targets: 
a. Have at least 60% of the R01-equivalent pool be MIRAs. 
b. Complete initial outcomes assessment for MIRA programs and continue to 
gather information to conduct additional periodic assessments. 
 
2. Strengthen the Institute’s ability to conduct in-depth analyses of the outcomes of its 
investigator-initiated portfolio (e.g., R01, R35) and use this information to inform 
current and future programmatic decisions. 
 
Targets: 
a. Conduct analyses of funding trends associated with NIGMS’ R01/R35 
research portfolio at least  annually and publish the results in the NIGMS 
Feedback Loop. 
b. Develop at least two new methods for assessing the outcomes and impact of 
investigator-initiated research. 
 
Goal 2:  Invest in the Development of a Skilled 21st Century Biomedical 
Research Workforce 
NIGMS strongly believes that the scientific enterprise is best served by a research workforce 
that incorporates various  scientific perspectives, skills, and disciplines. NIGMS supports 
nearly half of all NIH‐sponsored predoctoral students in structured institutional training 
programs across the country. NIGMS’ investments provide for  a geographically broad  
training and workforce infrastructure  that collectively foster scientific innovation, enhance 
global competitiveness, contribute to robust learning environments, improve the quality of 
research, enhance public trust, and increase the likelihood that the health needs of all 
populations are addressed in biomedical research.  
 
Objective 2‐1: Support highly effective, evidence-informed research training at all stages of 
the biomedical research training and career development pathway. 
Training encompasses both formal research training from undergraduate education onward, 
as well as  educational activities  that encourage students at the preK -12 level to pursue 
science as a career. NIGMS will continue its educational investments to ensure that the 
nation’s biomedical research needs are met, and will also support development of a robust 
workforce by providing opportunities for students from all communities to consider careers 
in basic, translational, or clinical research. 
Implementation Strategies: 
1. Promote the development and use of evidence -informed training and curricular 
activities that keep pace with the rapidly evolving biomedical research enterprise. 

--- PAGE 13 matched=['Objective 2', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
13 
 
 
Targets: 
a. Fund the development and dissemination of at least two freely available 
online training modules in key areas per year. 
b. Present at least 5 new, evidence-informed training and/or curricular activities 
at every biennial  NIGMS Training and Workforce Development ( TWD) 
program director’s meeting. 
 
2. Support effective, evidence -informed programs that develop mentoring skills of 
investigators and trainees.  
 
Targets: 
a. Ensure that all TWD funding opportunity announcements ( FOAs) emphasize 
mentoring skill development and assessment. 
b. Support development and dissemination of at least three freely available 
online training modules about mentor skill development and assessment. 
 
3. Emphasize quantitative and computational skills development in all TWD programs. 
 
Targets: 
a. Ensure that a ll TWD FOAs emphasize quantitative and computational skills 
development by 2022. 
b. Pilot at least three synergistic partnerships between TWD and Division for 
Research Capacity Building ( DRCB) grantees and organizations with special 
expertise and infrastructure (e.g., private sector, professional societies) to 
accelerate student and faculty quantitative and computational skills 
development. 
 
Objective 2‐2: Promote and enable the enhanced utilization of data in the development, 
assessment, and pursuit of research training outcomes. 
NIGMS will continue to support improvements in collecting and using outcomes data by both 
the Institute and the scientific community. This data driven approach will be used to 
continuously identify and improve training outcomes. It also will increase the Institute’s  
responsiveness to the changing  needs of the biomedical research workforce, avoids 
duplication of effort, and enhances efficiencies in mentorship. 
 
Implementation Strategies: 
1. Further refine retrospective and prospective methods to collect outcomes data from 
NIGMS research training and education activities.  
 
Target: 
a. Develop at least two significant new approaches for training outcomes 
analysis. 

--- PAGE 14 matched=['Goal 3', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
14 
 
 
2. Provide resources to aid the training community in developing evaluation and 
assessment capabilities.  
 
Targets: 
a. Launch at least one grants and/or administrative supplements initiative 
to enable training programs to develop the knowledge, skills , and 
infrastructure needed to conduct effective evaluations.  
b. Present a t least two effective evaluation and assessment strategies at 
each biennial TWD program director’s meeting.  
 
3. Utilize a mix of quantitative and qualitative data to guide the development and 
optimization of research training and education programs.  
 
Targets: 
a. Ensure that all TWD programs older than 10 years have been evaluated 
at least once in the past decade. 
b. Post all outcomes assessments and program evaluations on the NIGMS 
website, along with descriptions of any changes made to the programs 
based on the findings. 
 
4. Develop tools to rapidly assess and visualize key metrics of support, such as funding 
levels over time, geographic distribution, institution type, career stage, and 
associated outcomes. 
 
Target: 
a. Build and deploy TWD trainee statistics and outcomes data dashboard. 
 
Goal 3: Enhance Research Capacity and Enable Access to Critical Research 
Resources 
NIGMS seeks to advance the nation’s capabilities for biomedical research by enabling the 
broadest possible community of scientists to create, expand, and apply knowledge that leads 
to a deeper understanding of biological systems and, ultimately, the improvement of human 
health. This effort includes providing access to research resources and ensuring that 
investigators from a broad range of geographic regions and institutions are working at their 
full potential. NIGMS will leverage multiple strategies to build research infrastructure and 
capacity at academic institutions located in states that have historically received lower 
aggregate levels of NIH funding and at resource-limited institutions . To achieve this aim, the 
Institute will aid in the development and dissemination of new technologies and will work to 
ensure access to them as research resources. Efforts will also include continued support of 
research on the causes of and interventions to reduce health disparities in medically 

--- PAGE 15 matched=['Objective 3', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
15 
 
vulnerable communities, such as many rural communities. 
 
Objective 3‐1: Support access to essential research resources and the development of new 
technologies that enable novel scientific advances. 
Cutting-edge technologies are critical enablers of biomedical research and discovery. NIGMS 
will employ a multistage approach to support the full  continuum of research -enabling 
technology development , from proof of concept to maturation and  commercialization 
and/or utilization as a regional/national resource . The Institute continues to place a high 
level of importance on the development, enhancement, and dissemination of a broad range 
of cost‐effective, cutting‐edge, and productive research technologies across their lifespans. 
 
Implementation Strategies:  
1. Ensure strong support for the invention of transformative technologies to enable 
biomedical research.  
 
Targets: 
a. Complete initial outcomes assessment of NIGMS technology development 
R21 and R01 programs. 
b. Increase the number of patents linked to NIGMS grants since 2015 by 10%. 
c. Increase the number of start -up companies linked to NIGMS -funded 
technology development since 2015 by 10%. 
 
2. Expand the national availability and accessibility of research resources for 
investigators from all types of academic institutions and organizations. 
 
Targets: 
a. Leverage the National and Regional Research Resource program  to support 
access to at least five key technologies not currently accessible to most 
NIGMS-funded researchers. 
b. Increase the  majority of  the NIGMS National and Regional Research 
Resources grants userbase over the 5-year period of their awards by at least 
25%. 
 
3. Expand data collection mechanisms for national and regional resources (e.g., 
end-user utilization rates, frequencies).  
 
Target: 
a. Support at least five administrative supplements to resources to ward 
testing of new methods of data collection and dissemination of best 
practices.  
 
4. Optimize the Institute’s support of small business research and development by 
defining strategic priorities for commercial development, enabling access to 

--- PAGE 16 matched=['Objective 3', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
16 
 
entrepreneurial training and mentoring, and enhancing connections with other 
parts of the NIGMS technology research and development portfolio. 
 
Targets: 
a. Complete evaluation of NIGMS’ small business and commercialization -
support portfolio and programs. 
b. Award at least 10 new SBIR/STTR grants to former/current princip al 
investigators of NIGMS technology development R21s  or R01s, or 
Biomedical Technology Development and Dissemination Centers. 
c. Increase the number of patents linked to NIGMS grants since 2015 by 10%. 
d. Increase the number of start -up companies linked to NIGMS -funded 
technology development since 2015 by 10%. 
 
Objective 3‐2: Catalyze the development of institutional research capacities, particularly in 
traditionally underserved states, regions, communities, and institutions. 
NIGMS is committed to programs focused on building research capacities at academic 
institutions located in states that have historically received lower aggregate level s of NIH 
funding. These programs support basic, translational, and clinical research; research training; 
faculty development; and research infrastructure improvements to address specific health 
needs of resource-limited, rural,  and/or medically underserved communities. In addition, 
NIGMS will continue its aid and support to American Indian/Alaska Native tribes and tribally 
based organizations, as well as to resource-limited institutions, in building robust research 
and technological capacities that address challenging biomedical questions  and health 
needs.  
 
Implementation Strategies: 
1. Support programs and initiatives that enhance entrepreneurial culture and 
infrastructure in Institutional Development Award (IDeA)-eligible states. 
 
Targets: 
a. Achieve s uccessful recompetition of the IDeA State Technology Transfer 
Accelerator Hubs program. 
b. Develop and launch IDeA State Technology Transfer Accelerator Hubs 
outcomes dashboard. 
c. Increase SBIR/STTR grant applications from IDeA states since 2015  by at 
least 10%. 
d. Increase patents linked to NIH grants from IDeA states since 2015 by at least 
10%. 
 
2. Promote renewed support for basic research at IDeA state institutions.  
 
Target: 
a. Increase the number of Centers of Biomedical Research Excellence awards 

--- PAGE 17 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
17 
 
with a basic science focus by 20%. 
 
3. Enhance clinical research capacity in IDeA states and in federally recognized nations 
of American Indians and Alaska Natives to help address the specific health challenges 
and disparities faced by the communities in those states and tribal nations. 
 
Target: 
a. Establish and/or participate in one or more initiatives to promote the ability 
of IDeA-state and tribally based researchers, institutions, and organizations 
to participate in and conduct clinical trials. 
 
4. Support effective, evidence-informed training and career-building programs that 
develop mentoring skills of investigators and trainees. 
 
Target: 
a. Ensure that a ll DRCB FOAs involv ing a training component emphasize 
mentoring skill development and assessment by 2023. 
 
5. Strengthen training in quantitative and computational research and skills in all 
NIGMS capacity building programs including IDeA, Support for Research 
Excellence (SuRE), Native American Research Centers for Health ( NARCH), and 
SEPA. 
 
Targets: 
a. Ensure that a ll DRCB FOAs involv ing a training component emphasize 
quantitative and computational skills development by 2023. 
b. Pilot at least three synergistic partnerships between TWD and DRCB grantees 
and organizations with special expertise and infrastructure (e.g., private 
sector, professional societies) to accelerate student and faculty quantitative 
and computational skills development. 
 
6. Enable iterative evaluations and assessments that allow for the continual 
development and enhancement of NIGMS’ capacity building programs and 
initiatives. 
 
Targets: 
a. Ensure that all DRCB programs older than 10 years have been evaluated at 
least once in the past decade. 
b. Post all outcomes assessments and program evaluations on the NIGMS 
website, along with descriptions of any changes made to the programs 
based on the findings. 
  

--- PAGE 18 matched=['Goal 4', 'Objective 4', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
18 
 
Serving as an Efficient and Effective Steward of Public Resources 
Goal 4: Advance the Public’s Understanding of NIGMS-Supported Research, 
Training, and Capacity Building Programs and  the Critical Role of Basic 
Biomedical Research 
 
Robust, data-informed communication is a bedrock of scientific education, exploration, and 
discovery. NIGMS employs a variety of communication strategies to inform and engage its 
stakeholders and the general public. These strategies include RFIs and social media posts to 
obtain stakeholder perspectives and feedback, press and governmental communications , 
educational materials , and online resources for biomedical trainees  and investigators. By 
implementing these strategies,  NIGMS continues to effectively advance the public’s 
understanding of the vital role played by the Institute’s scientific investments in improving 
public health and health outcomes.  
 
Objective 4‐1: Leverage a broad range of outreach approaches and resources to disseminate 
accurate, timely, and clear information about NIGMS goals, activities, results, and returns on 
investment to the public. 
NIGMS will continue to use a variety of communication approaches, channels, and 
partnerships to develop and distribute information about scientific findings, the role of basic 
research in scientific discovery, and the excitement of careers in science. These activities will 
ensure that NIGMS’ mission and resources will be disseminated to all public sectors.   
 
Implementation Strategies:  
1. Disseminate information about NIGMS -funded programs and outcomes to 
investigators and trainees at all career levels.  
 
Target: 
a. Increase the number of individuals signed up for Feedback Loop by at least 
20%.   
 
2. Leverage web and social media analytics as well as stakeholder feedback (e.g., RFIs ) 
to broaden NIGMS’ communications strategies. 
 
Target: 
a. Increase user engagements with NIGMS outreach efforts by at least 10%. 
 
3. Develop strategic partnerships with organizations that can provide access to 
communities not currently reached through NIGMS’ outreach efforts (e.g., retirees). 
 
Targets: 

--- PAGE 19 matched=['Goal 5', 'Objective 4', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
19 
 
a. Forge at least one new communications partnership. 
b. Pitch at least five NIGMS-supported STEM and training resources per year to 
external publications (e.g., society websites, trade journals, news outlets). 
 
Objective 4‐2: Enhance transparency and accountability by continuing to engage in an open 
dialogue with NIGMS stakeholders about the importance and impact of NIGMS priorities, 
programs, processes, and policies. 
NIGMS broadly disseminates information about its programs and policies and also invites 
and responds to feedback from its constituents. NIGMS will continue a conversation with the 
scientific community and other stakeholders through various avenues . These strategies will 
ensure that NIGMS optimizes its investments on behalf of the scientific community and 
general public.  
Implementation Strategy: 
1. Encourage and analyze feedback from the scientific community (e.g., RFIs), including 
investigators and trainees at all levels, grantee organizations, scientific and 
professional societies, and other stakeholders to ensure an open dialogue about 
NIGMS priorities, programs, processes, and policies. 
 
Targets: 
a. Issue and analyze at least five RFIs related to NIGMS’ priorities, plans, and 
programs. 
b. Launch a campaign in partnership with key professional societies to promote 
NIGMS programs. 
c. Launch a virtual meeting with trainees to hear their ideas and concerns. 
 
Goal 5: Maintain or Enhance Investments in the NIGMS Workforce and 
Operations to Better Enable Delivery of the Institute’s Mission 
NIGMS relies on the efforts of its talented and dedicated staff to accomplish its core activities 
of reviewing, awarding, and managing its grants and contracts. The Institute is therefore 
committed to supporting ongoing staff training and encouraging participation in professional 
development activities to help maintain the organizational agility needed for optimal work 
performance. In addition, NIGMS will continue iterative reviews of its internal business 
practices and processes to ensure optimal and efficient operations.  
 
Objective 5‐1: Foster a proficient, effective and high quality NIGMS workforce. 
A knowledgeable and skilled workforce that is aligned with NIGMS’ mission is a key element 
in the overall success  of the Institute. NIGMS will support the ongoing professional 
development and training of staff to maintain organizational agility and adaptability, both of 
which are necessary to achieve optimal performance.  
 

--- PAGE 20 matched=['Objective 5', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
20 
 
Implementation Strategies: 
 
1. Ensure continued career development and training opportunities for NIGMS staff, 
including use of individual development plans (IDPs). 
 
Targets: 
a. Increase the voluntary use of IDPs among nonsupervisory staff by at least 
50%. 
b. Increase participation in career development and training activities by at least 
25%. 
 
2. Support leadership, management, and supervisory training for NIGMS supervisors.  
 
Targets: 
a. Launch a yearly management and leadership lecture series organized by the 
NIGMS Grants, Analytics, and Program (GAP) committee by the end of 2021 
and host one lecture per year thereafter. 
b. Ensure that s upervisors who have been at the Institute for 3 or more years  
have participated in the NIH Senior Leadership Program (or equivalent). 
 
Objective 5 ‐2: Maximize the efficiency of NIGMS operations by continuously assessing, 
identifying, and applying  business practices that promote effective and efficient 
management and stewardship of taxpayer investments. 
The ability of NIGMS to deliver on its mission requires optimizing the integration of business 
processes and practices with emerging technology solutions (e.g., machine learning/natural 
language processing) to streamline and automate (when possible) the work of its staff. 
NIGMS will continuously seek opportunities to streamline labor -intensive workflows  and 
integrate its business processes and tools with NIH-wide enterprise systems. 
Implementation Strategy: 
1. Continue to optimize internal operating procedures and processes to maximize the 
efficiency of NIGMS business operations. 
 
Targets: 
a. Have t he GAP committee identify at least one operational inefficiency or 
other issue per year and propose to senior staff a solution to improve it. 
b. Decrease the use of paper-based business processes by at least 50%. 
 
Objective 5‐3: Enhance the collection, analysis, and utilization of data to iteratively assess, 
evaluate, and optimize NIGMS operations. 
NIGMS will employ various data collection, assessment, visualization, and improvement 
tools to support the  continual improvement and optimization of its internal operational 

--- PAGE 21 matched=['Objective 5', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
21 
 
activities.  
 
Implementation Strategy: 
1. Promote transparency about the use of data in decision -making for Institute 
functions.  
 
Targets: 
a. Build and deploy an administrative data dashboard to track key metrics  to 
help staff optimize efficiency of operations.  
b. Build and deploy a budget data dashboard to streamline routine budget office 
monitoring of expenditures and to provide division directors and NIGMS 
leadership access to the data.   
 
Objective 5‐4: Continue to enhance and evolve NIGMS information systems, technologies, 
and related infrastructures to ensure maximal security and utility. 
NIGMS is committed to developing comprehensive protection and security for the privacy 
and integrity of its information and information systems. The Institute’s Information 
Resources Management Branch (IRMB) will continuously update and maintain maximally 
secure data systems, enable staff access to needed technological and data resources, and 
improve the physical infrastructure of information technology within the Institute.  
 
Implementation Strategies: 
1. Leverage the latest information technologies to help advance NIGMS’ business 
operations.  
 
Targets: 
a. Complete implementation of cloud technology to maximize business support 
applications.  
b. Develop at least one new method utilizing artificial intelligence, machine 
learning, and/or natural language processing to enhance the efficiency of 
business processes.  
c. Assess mobile device operability of NIGMS websites and internal information 
technology tools at least biennially. 
d. Assess NIGMS systems and business practices for their suitability to be 
integrated with or replaced by NIH enterprise systems at least annually. 
 
2. Optimize information technology services for the curation, analysis, visualization, 
and expansion of data used for strategic decisions.  
 
Target: 
a. Build and deploy TWD trainee statistics and outcomes data dashboard. 
 

--- PAGE 22 matched=['Objective 5', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
22 
 
3. Enhance the cybersecurity and privacy of NIGMS information systems.  
 
Target: 
a. Complete assessment of the NIGMS information technology infrastructure at 
least annually. 
 
4. Provide optimal support for NIGMS users and community outreach platforms. 
 
Target: 
a. Evaluate NIGMS external and internal websites at least once to ensure they 
meet user expectations and needs.  
 
Objective 5‐5: Develop and optimize cooperative and synergistic partnerships with other NIH 
institutes and centers, other federal agencies, and other organizations. 
NIGMS exists within an ecosystem of scientific relationships, serving as an important player 
in the network of stakeholders striving toward scientific discovery and advancement. These 
relationships encompass a variety of activities such as creating FOAs, publishing notices of 
special interest, participating in working groups on scientific and administrative topics, 
serving on coordinating committees, and contributing analyses  to trans-NIH initiatives. 
Developing, leveraging, and enhancing partnerships within NIH and throughout the federal 
government serves to strengthen NIGMS’ capabilities and broaden the impact of its actions.   
 
Implementation Strategy:  
1. Continue to build and leverage productive partnerships to increase the efficiency, 
effectiveness, and reach of NIGMS in areas related to the Institute’s mission. 
 
Targets: 
a. Conduct at least one collaboration with  the Office of Extramural 
Research/electronic Research Administration  to optimize NIH enterprise 
systems for better support of NIGMS and NIH business processes. 
b. Develop at least one collaboration to enhance the Institute’s ability to track 
outcomes data for one or more of its programs. 
 
  

--- PAGE 23 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'goals and objectives', 'mission'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
23 
 
Priority Setting 
 
NIGMS priorities contained in this strategic plan were informed by a combination of factors 
including, but not limited to, core components of the Institute’s mission (e.g., supporting 
individual investigator-initiated research), input from the National Advisory General Medical 
Sciences Council , feedback received from the extramural scientific community via a 
published Request for Information (e.g., RFI NOT-GM-20-034), and input from NIGMS staff 
via a series of internal focus groups.   These sources of input and feedback were utilized to 
create a balanced set of priorities representative of NIGMS’ mission areas. 
Closing 
 
The NIGMS 2021-2025 strategic plan sets the Institute’s direction over the next 5 years and 
will serve as  a management tool to help the Institute achieve  its goals and meet its 
obligations to the American public. The creation of this forward -looking document is 
consistent with the Institute’s philosophy of demonstrating the highest levels of operational 
integrity, transparency, and accountability. The plan builds on the successes of NIGMS’ prior 
strategic plan, the outcomes of which are publicly available . A similar outcomes document 
will be produced once the goals and objectives contained in this plan have been pursued and 
evaluated.   
 
Description of Strategic Plan Development Process  
 
Development and Dissemination of 2021-2025 Strategic Plan Framework 
• Senior NIGMS leadership developed and reviewed the 2021 -2025 strategic plan 
framework in the spring of 2020.  
• NIGMS Director Dr. Jon Lorsch presented the 2021-2025 strategic plan framework 
for discussion at the May 2020 NIGMS Advisory Council meeting. 
• In June 2020, NIGMS issued an RFI  to gather input from the public and further 
inform the development of the 2021-2025 strategic plan framework. NIGMS staff 
analyzed RFI comments and presented the information to senior leadership. 
• At the September 2020 NIGMS Advisory Council meeting, Dr. Lorsch presented a 
timeline for completing the strategic plan and its dissemination.  
 
Development and Dissemination of the Final 2021-2025 Strategic Plan  
• In early 2021, NIGMS held internal working groups with NIGMS staff to solicit 
feedback on the strategic plan framework and further develop implementation 
strategies and targets for each goal and objective. 
• At the February 2021 NIGMS Advisory Council meeting , DIMA Division Director, 
Dr. Richard Aragon  presented the revised strategic plan framework, which 
included strategic goals, objectives, implementation strategies, and targets. 

--- PAGE 24 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
2021-2025 NIGMS Strategic Plan 
 
24 
 
• NIGMS convened a second round of  internal focus groups to give feedback on  
Council comments and suggest modifications to  implementation strategies and 
targets.  
• NIGMS senior leadership considered all comments and finalized the strategic 
plan. 
• NIGMS revised the plan in 2025 to ensure  its compliance  with all relevant 
administration executive orders. 
 
