# NIH-Wide (2021-2025) — file: NIH_Wide_Strategic_Plan_FY2021-2025.pdf
# 68 pages matched priority-heading patterns


--- PAGE 3 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
i
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Director’s Message
To the American People,
As our nation’s biomedical research agency, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
has been the driving force behind many of the recent innovations in science and 
technology that are improving the health of all humankind. The coming years 
are certain to offer many exciting new opportunities for scientific exploration—
and to pose some serious new challenges for human health. To rise to those 
opportunities and challenges, it is imperative that NIH, along with all sectors of 
society, work together in unprecedented ways with unprecedented speed.
Indeed, science is moving faster than ever before. To fuel this engine of discovery, NIH must continue to 
support the highest caliber research throughout the country and the world, while at the same time take 
vigorous steps to uphold the ethical conduct of science. NIH will further enhance the science of tomorrow 
by continuing its efforts to build a next generation of researchers that better reflects the rich, creative 
diversity of our great nation. The increasingly complex scientific questions that our society will face in the 
future will require not only diversity of scientific disciplines, but also diversity of thought, experience, and 
demographics.
As a publicly funded agency, NIH has a responsibility to be a good steward of the funds entrusted 
to us by the U.S. taxpayers. NIH will do this by investing efficiently and effectively in a wide range of 
basic, translational, clinical, and applied research, while at the same time supporting the workforce and 
infrastructure required for a sustainable research enterprise. As outlined in this Strategic Plan, this approach 
will enable NIH to build a solid foundation of fundamental knowledge about living systems that will serve to 
accelerate research aimed at addressing our most pressing health needs. 
NIH’s mission is to turn discovery into health. We thank you for your strong and steadfast support of this 
crucial mission, and we look forward to your continued support as we strive to use the power of science to 
create a healthier and more productive life for all.    
With sincere appreciation, 
Francis S. Collins
Director, National Institutes of Health 


--- PAGE 5 matched=['Objective 1', 'Strategic Plan', 'Table of Contents'] ---
iii
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Table of Contents
Director’s Message ............................................................................................. i
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan Framework ............................................................... vii
Overview of NIH ...................................................................................................1
Mission and Goals  ........................................................................................................... 1
Organization  .................................................................................................................... 1
  Supporting Researchers and Universities Through the Extramural 
Research Program ...................................................................................................... 1
  Research in Action in the NIH Intramural Research Program .................................. 2
  Pioneering Clinical Research at the NIH Clinical Center  ........................................... 2
NIH’s Strategy ......................................................................................................3
Objective 1: Advancing Biomedical and Behavioral Sciences ............................................ 3
Driving Foundational Science ......................................................................................... 3
  Building Data Resources to Enable Research Progress  ........................................... 4
  Inventing Tools and Technologies to Catalyze Discovery .......................................... 6
  Understanding Biological, Behavioral, and Social Determinants of 
Population Health ........................................................................................................ 7
Preventing Disease and Promoting Health ..................................................................... 8
  Developing New and Improved Vaccines  .................................................................. 8
  Addressing Risk and Burden of Disease  ................................................................... 9
  Harnessing Technology to Inform Decision-Making  ............................................... 10
  Designing Research for Everyone ............................................................................ 11
Developing and Optimizing Treatments, Interventions, and Cures ............................. 11
  Giving the Right Treatment to the Right Patient at the Right Time ........................ 12
  Catalyzing Cell Engineering, Bioengineering, and Regenerative Medicine ........... 13
  Meeting Emerging Public Health Needs .................................................................. 14
  Partnering to Advance Treatments and Cures ........................................................ 15
Objective 2: Developing, Maintaining, and Renewing Scientific Research Capacity ....... 16
Enhancing the Biomedical and Behavioral Research Workforce  ................................ 16
Supporting Research Resources and Infrastructure ................................................... 18

--- PAGE 6 matched=['Objective 3', 'Crosscutting Theme', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
iv
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Objective 3: Exemplifying and Promoting the Highest Level of Scientific Integrity,  
Public Accountability, and Social Responsibility in the Conduct of Science .................... 20
 Fostering a Culture of Good Scientific Stewardship .................................................... 21
  Setting Priorities ........................................................................................................ 21
  Monitoring Expenditures and Scientific Progress ................................................... 21
  Making Evidence-Informed Decisions ...................................................................... 22
  Assessing Programs, Processes, Outcomes, and Impact ...................................... 22
  Communicating Results  ........................................................................................... 23
 Leveraging Partnerships ............................................................................................... 24
  Federal Partnerships  ................................................................................................ 24
  Public-Private Partnerships  ..................................................................................... 25
  International Partnerships ........................................................................................ 26
  Public Engagement ................................................................................................... 26
 Ensuring Accountability and Confidence in Biomedical and Behavioral Sciences  .... 27
  Enhancing Reproducibility Through Rigorous and Transparent Research ............ 27
  Improving Stewardship of Clinical Trials .................................................................. 27
  Assuring Ethical and Equitable Conduct of Research Through Inclusion  ............. 27
  Maintaining Transparency Through Data Access and Sharing  .............................. 28
  Fostering a Safe and Harassment-Free Work Environment  ................................... 28
  Managing Risks to the Research Enterprise  ........................................................... 29
  Reducing Administrative Costs and Work Throughout the Grants Process .......... 30
 Optimizing Operations  ................................................................................................... 30
Crosscutting Themes  .......................................................................................................... 32
 Improving Minority Health and Reducing Health Disparities 32
 Enhancing Women’s Health ..........................................................
 .......................................
................................. 33
 Addressing Public Health Challenges Across the Lifespan  ......................................... 33
 Promoting Collaborative Science  ................................................................................. 34
 Leveraging Data Science for Biomedical Discovery .................................................... 34
Bold Predictions ................................................................................................35
References .........................................................................................................37

--- PAGE 7 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
v
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Appendix I: NIH Statutory Authority .................................................................42
Appendix II: NIH Organizational Chart ..............................................................43
Appendix III: Strategic Planning Process .........................................................44
Appendix IV: NIH Common Fund Strategic Plan Report  ..................................46
Appendix V: Acronyms ......................................................................................61
Acknowledgments .............................................................................................64

--- PAGE 9 matched=['CROSSCUTTING THEME', 'Strategic Plan', 'MISSION'] ---
MISSION:
To seek fundamental knowledge about the nature and behavior of living systems and the application 
of that knowledge to enhance health, lengthen life, and reduce illness and disability 
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan Framework
OVERVIEW OF NIH
NIH’S STRATEGY
Public Health 
Challenges Across 
the Lifespan
Collaborative 
Science
Minority Health 
and Health 
Disparities
Women’s Health Data Science
Research Areas Research Capacity Research Conduct
Foundational Science
Disease Prevention and 
Health Promotion
Treatments, Interventions, 
and Cures
Workforce
Infrastructure and Resources
Stewardship
Partnerships
Accountability and Conﬁdence
Management and Operations
OBJECTIVES
ORGANIZATION: 27 Institutes and Centers and the Ofﬁce of the Director
• Extramural program: supporting research across the U.S. and beyond
• Intramural program: supporting research on NIH campuses
CROSSCUTTING THEMES
viiNIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025

--- PAGE 11 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'Mission', 'division of '] ---
1
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Overview of NIH
a For the purposes of this Strategic Plan, the term biomedical is used broadly to include biological, behavioral, and social scientific 
perspectives.
Mission and Goals 
At the National Institutes of Health (NIH), “Turning 
Discovery into Health” is what its tens of thousands 
of employees—and the hundreds of thousands of 
scientists it supports—strive to accomplish every 
day. As the foremost agency for funding biomedical 
research
a in the U.S., NIH’s mission is to seek funda-
mental knowledge about the nature and behavior of 
living systems and to use that knowledge to enhance 
health, lengthen life, and reduce illness and disability 
(Figure 1).
1 To achieve this mission, NIH works to 
support innovative research ultimately aimed at 
protecting and improving human health; train the 
biomedical research workforce and develop scientific 
infrastructure; contribute to the nation’s economic 
growth by expanding the biomedical knowledge 
base; and promote integrity, public accountability, 
and societal responsibility in scientific research. As an 
operating division of the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services (HHS), NIH is responsible for 
carrying out the Department’s goal of advancing 
scientific knowledge and innovation. NIH catalyzes 
life-saving research breakthroughs by providing criti-
cal funding to eligible research institutions throughout 
the nation and the world, and through the research 
conducted in NIH laboratories.
While NIH’s primary mission is the conduct of 
research, the agency is also a trusted resource for 
accurate and timely biomedical information. NIH’s 
biomedical information platforms are among the most 
visited websites in the federal government, giving 
researchers, health care professionals, and the public 
highquality information and data necessary to make 
informed decisions. 
Organization
NIH is made up of 27 Institutes and Centers (ICs), 
and the NIH Office of the Director (OD).
2 Each IC has 
its own mission and research priorities focused on 
specific diseases, body systems, life stages, or fields 
of science. The NIH OD sets policy and provides 
guidance, in addition to serving as a resource for 
planning, managing, and coordinating the programs 
and activities of all of NIH. 
NIH receives its annual funding, or appropriation, 
from the U.S. Congress. More than 80 percent of this 
funding is passed on to researchers and research 
institutions around the country—the extramural 
research community—through a rigorous, competitive 
process, while about 11 percent of NIH’s budget sup-
ports intramural projects conducted by scientists in 
its own laboratories, which are subject to an equally 
rigorous review.
3
Supporting Researchers and Universities 
Through the Extramural Research Program
Every year, NIH receives more than 54,000 research 
project grant applications4 and funds almost 50,000 
new and continuing grants. These grants support 
more than 300,000 researchers at all career stages, 
including more than 43,000 principal investigators at 
approximately 2,500 universities, medical schools, 
and other research institutions in every state of 
the U.S. and around the world. This enterprise is 
managed by NIH staff who facilitate and administer 
scientific programs, consult with scientific experts to 
inform priority setting, and act as agency experts for 
specific scientific areas.
NIH’s funding decisions are made through a h

--- PAGE 12 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
2
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
mechanisms—are used to support NIH’s broad scien-
tific portfolio,7 allowing maximum flexibility to fund the 
rapidly advancing needs of the biomedical research 
community. These mechanisms are used to support 
a wide range of efforts—from individual research 
projects, to international consortia and networks, to 
training opportunities—each of which may be tailored 
to meet specific goals. For example, to create innova-
tive technologies that advance its mission and move 
them toward uptake in the market, NIH supports 
the Small Business Innovation Research and Small 
Business Technology Transfer programs. 
Research in Action in the NIH Intramural 
Research Program
The NIH Intramural Research Program conducts 
NIH’s in-house research and is the largest institution 
committed to biomedical and behavioral research, 
research training, and career development in the 
world.
8 The mission of the Intramural Research 
Program is to conduct distinctive, high-impact 
laboratory, clinical, and population-based research; 
facilitate new approaches to improve health through 
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment; respond to 
public health emergencies; and train the next genera-
tion of biomedical researchers. The program supports 
approximately 8,000 basic, translational, and clinical 
researchers at NIH research facilities located across 
the U.S., including the main NIH campus in Bethesda, 
Maryland; Research Triangle Park in North Carolina; 
Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center in Baltimore, 
Maryland; Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer 
Research in Frederick, Maryland; Rocky Mountain 
Laboratories in Hamilton, Montana; the Perinatology 
Research Branch in Detroit, Michigan; and the 
Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical Research Branch 
in Phoenix, Arizona. Scientists in the Intramural 
Research Program include an estimated 1,200 
principal investigators, 1,800 staff clinicians and 
staff scientists, and 5,000 trainees. Many important 
medical breakthroughs take place in the intramural 
research laboratories. 
Pioneering Clinical Research at the NIH 
Clinical Center 
The NIH Intramural Research Program includes the 
NIH Clinical Center,9 the world’s largest hospital 
devoted exclusively to clinical research. The NIH 
Clinical Center is designed to rapidly transition 
scientific observations and laboratory discoveries 
into clinical studies and bedside cures by bringing 
together talented investigators and specialized 
infrastructure, including unique patient cohorts, state-
of-the-art equipment, and specialized services. Since 
its opening in 1953, more than half a million patients 
have been active partners with NIH in medical 
discovery. This partnership has resulted in a long list 
of medical milestones, including the development of 
chemotherapy for cancer; the development of some 
of the earliest artificial heart valves; the demonstration 
that lithium treats depression; and the first treatment 
of HIV/AIDS with azidothymidine.
10
About 1,600 clinical research studies are in progress 
at the NIH Clinical Center. Approximately half are 
studies of the natural history of disease, while most 
of the other studies are clinical trials, often the 
first tests of new drugs and therapies in people. 
Participants come from all 50 U.S. states and around 
the world. With its unique ability to assemble cohorts 
of participants with rare diseases, the NIH Clinical 
Center plays an important role in

--- PAGE 13 matched=['Crosscutting Theme', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
3
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
NIH’s Strategy
To carry out its mission and optimize return on public investment, NIH has designed a strategic Framework 
that includes three key Objectives that align with the agency’s goals. These three Objectives outline NIH’s 
priorities in (1) biomedical and behavioral research areas, (2) research capacity, and (3) research conduct. 
Across all of these priorities, NIH emphasizes several Crosscutting Themes—approaches that are common 
to all Objectives of the Strategic Plan—including improving minority health and reducing health disparities; 
enhancing women’s health; addressing public health challenges across the lifespan; promoting collaborative 
science; and leveraging data science for biomedical discovery. Examples of these important crosscutting 
topics are located throughout the three Objectives.
The NIH portfolio is designed with the breadth and 
flexibility to address current public health needs, 
emerging areas of scientific opportunity, and public 
health emergencies, such as the coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic (Figure 2). Over the next 
5 years, NIH will drive cutting-edge biomedical and 
behavioral sciences forward on three interrelated 
fronts—foundational science, disease prevention and 
health promotion, and treatments, interventions, and 
cures.
Driving Foundational Science
NIH supports a broad range of foundational scientific 
research to provide the building blocks for future 
diagnostics, treatments, and cures across the entire 
spectrum of health, diseases, and conditions, includ-
ing those that are emerging, rare, or have yet to be 
discovered. 
Foundational science includes basic biological, 
behavioral, and social research that generates the 
knowledge of how living systems work at the molecu-
lar, cellular, organismal, behavioral, and social levels.
11 
Basic research can be experimental or observational 
and may involve manipulating molecules in test 
tubes and cells in culture dishes, studying animal 
models of disease (Figure 3), or conducting studies 
to understand human health and disease processes. 
Basic research also includes epidemiological studies 
Advancing Biomedical and Behavioral Sciences1OBJECTIVE
Credit: Rocky Mountain Laboratory, NIAID, NIH.
Figure 2. COVID-19 Research  
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an emergent 
human disease caused by a naturally arising novel corona-
virus, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2). This scanning electron microscope image 
shows SARS-CoV-2 (round gold objects) emerging from 
the surface of cells cultured in the laboratory. NIH sup-
ports research to understand SARS-CoV-2 and mitigate 
the threat of COVID-19 for the health of all people by 
building on existing and accelerating the development of 
new research initiatives focused on five research priorities 
detailed in the NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for COVID-19 
Research. NIH is improving basic understanding of 
SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 and developing the necessary 
tools and approaches to better diagnose, prevent, and 
treat this devastating disease. Pandemics recur, and NIH 
is also considering how to enhance preparedness for the 
next one. 

--- PAGE 14 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
4
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
to examine disease burden, distribution, and potential 
risk and protective factors in specific populations, as 
well as natural history studies that follow individuals 
over time to observe early stages and progression 
of a disease. NIH-supported research serves as the 
world’s leading source of foundational knowledge of 
relevance to both the public and private sectors of 
biomedicine.
12 
Much of the research process is car
efully planned 
and conducted, but serendipitous discoveries can 
also drive progress. Because science explores the 
unknown, it is not always possible to predict where 
research will lead. This concept is especially true for 
basic research, which integrates biology, behavior, 
environment, medicine, physics, chemistry, engineer-
ing, and data science to pioneer novel technologies 
capable of exploring the individual components of 
life. Investments in basic science result in unexpected 
breakthroughs and new fields of inquiry that could not 
have been envisioned when the original experiments 
were designed. For example, scientists leveraged 
the discovery of the CRISPR system, a component 
of the bacterial immune system that responds to 
viral infection, to develop a molecular tool for editing 
genes with exquisite precision. This technology 
has revolutionized the ability to study genes and 
holds great promise for treating numerous genetic 
disorders. By investing in foundational science, NIH is 
laying the groundwork for important future advances 
that will improve the nation’s health. 
Building Data Resources to Enable 
Research Progress 
NIH supports the creation of foundational data 
resources that enable basic research and improve 
understanding of the biological and environmental 
factors that contribute to human health and disease. 
NIH achieves this effort by funding investigators who 
are studying and cataloging molecules that are the 
basic building blocks of life—such as DNA, RNA, and 
proteins—as well as researchers who are establishing 
and collecting data from large cohorts of research 
participants. The resulting datasets have the potential 
to catalyze whole fields of research, as well as lead 
to the development of new diagnostic tools and 
therapies. 
The 21st century opened with a crowning achieve-
ment of basic science, sequencing the human 
genome—the complete collection of genetic informa-
tion within an individual. This achievement became 
the foundation for the branch of science that studies 
genomes across individuals to find patterns in health 
and disease and to uncover mechanisms to under-
stand how genes interact with one another and with a 
person’s environment. The immense amount of data 
produced by genomic studies is helping researchers 
understand how the complex interactions among 
different regions of the genome influence human 
development, aging, and health. One major genomic 
data resource is the ENCyclopedia of DNA Elements 
(ENCODE), which is aimed at identifying the function 
of all parts of the human and mouse genomes and 
has already been cited by thousands of research 
publications.
13 The Clinical Genome (ClinGen) 
Resource catalogues the physical, clinical, and 
genetic characteristics of individuals to better under-
stand how small changes, or variants, in a person’s 
genome are related to their health.
14 NIH will continue 
to support the expansion of these databases and 
improvement of the tools researchers 

--- PAGE 15 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
5
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
groups that have been historically underrepresented 
in genomics research.15 
Harnessing the power of DNA-sequencing tech-
nologies, NIH-funded scientists have also created 
fundamental datasets important to microbiome 
r
esearch, or the study of the microbes—including 
bacteria, viruses, and fungi—that live on and in the 
human body. The average healthy adult is host to 
trillions of microbes that live in the gut, in the mouth, 
or on the skin, for example. The composition of the 
microbiome influences human health and response to 
treatment, contributes to early development, affects 
the immune system, and plays a role in metabolism. 
The NIH Common Fund’s
b Human Microbiome 
Project (HMP), conducted from 2007 to 2016, was 
the first large-scale effort to map and identify the 
thousands of species of microbes in the human 
microbiome (Figure 4).
16 HMP generated a compre-
hensive profile of the microbiome from multiple body 
sites from more than 300 healthy people and created 
computational tools and resources to enable more 
research. HMP also collected microbiome and human 
data from three longterm cohort studies centered on 
pregnancy and preterm birth, inflammatory bowel 
disease, and type 2 diabetes.
Ongoing studies supported by NIH are investigating 
how the microbiome of pregnant women may affect 
the risk of preterm birth;
17 exploring the possibility of 
using complementary foods—foods given in addition 
to those regularly consumed in the diet—to boost the 
gut microbiome and treat childhood malnutrition;
18 
understanding how beneficial microbes in the mouth 
protect against periodontal disease or other oral 
infections;
19 and uncovering how the microbiome 
influences cancer development and response to 
therapy.
20 One particularly promising area of research 
is exploring the role of the microbiome in the onset 
of chronic conditions involving immune system 
dysfunction, such as cardiovascular disease and 
inflammatory diseases of the gut.
21 
Studies that generate large datasets from diverse 
participants pr
ovide vital fundamental research 
resources. The Adolescent Brain Cognitive 
Development (ABCD)
22 study is the largest long-term 
study of brain development and child health in the 
U.S. This study has recruited more than 11,000 
children 9 to 10 years of age, who will be followed 
into adulthood to explore how childhood experiences 
b  For more information on the NIH Common Fund, see Appendix IV.
affect brain development and a variety of health- 
related outcomes. Data collection is ongoing, and 
researchers from within and outside the ABCD study 
are using the data generated to conduct research on 
such topics as the link between screen time and brain 
structure,
23 effects of prenatal exposure to cannabis 
use,24 and the relationship between sleep and brain 
structure and function.25 
Many NIH-funded projects span multiple areas of 
r
esearch and include both basic and applied science. 
The ambitious Brain Research through Advancing 
Innovative Neurotechnologies
® (BRAIN) Initiative aims 
to answer fundamental questions about how brain 
circuits work; how they become impaired in neuro-
logical, psychiatric, and substance use disorders; 
and how to improve the function of these circuits to 
treat brain disorders (Figure 5).
26 Components of the 
BRAIN Initiative® include studies to record, image, 
and manipulate brain circuits with the aim of develop-
ing treatmen

--- PAGE 16 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
6
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
widespread sharing and interpretation of research 
data; and efforts to discover and catalogue the 
multitude of types of brain cells. 
The complexity of the nearly 170 billion cells in a 
human brain presents a formidable challenge to 
understanding how different cell types work in brain 
circuits, their role in disease, and how they might 
be targeted directly by new therapies. Advances in 
engineering and highthroughput methods to classify 
individual cell types have enabled new opportunities 
to tackle this challenge. The BRAIN Initiative
® Cell 
Census Network is developing a comprehensive 
mouse brain cell atlas and applying cell type identi-
fication methods to studies of human brain tissue.
27 
Scientists have begun to use these methods to deter-
mine precisely which human brain cells ar
e affected in 
a range of conditions, including Alzheimer’s disease 
and related dementias, autism spectrum disorder, and 
Zika virus infection. 
Inventing Tools and Technologies to 
Catalyze Discovery
Fundamental research includes the creation of 
advanced biomedical research tools and technologies 
for scientists to answer questions about biology and 
human health. For example, imaging technology 
has transformed science, allowing researchers to 
“see” individual molecules interacting, measure brain 
function, study internal tissues, visualize cell function-
ing in 3-D in real time, and locate specific molecules 
in the body using chemical tags. 
Certain NIH programs are initiated specifically to spur 
the development of new tools and technologies for 
research use. The NIH Common Fund’s Single Cell 
Analysis Program (SCAP) focused on developing 
tools to explore the behavior of single cells, including 
new ways to track cells in living multicellular organ-
isms, new imaging techniques and technologies, and 
sequencing of the genome and transcriptome—the 
collection of all gene readouts present in a cell.
28 
Resources developed through SCAP have paved the 
way for research that may lead to breakthroughs in 
understanding the human body at the level of individ-
ual cells, rather than groups or populations of cells. 
Such resources include the NIH Common Fund’s 
Human BioMolecular Atlas Program (HuBMAP), a col-
laborative effort to develop a global open platform to 
map the approximately 37 trillion cells in the human 
body to understand how the relationships between 
cells can affect a person’s health.
29
New technologies are yielding data in quantities 
and at a level of complexity that requires increased 
capacity for storage, management, and analysis. 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is being used on big datasets 
to augment human ability to detect patterns and 
predict outcomes, thus offering significant promise to 
advance research. NIH will build a large and diverse 
set of programs to foster machine learning (a subset 
of AI), support the generation and management of 
large-scale datasets, convene multidisciplinary teams 
of researchers, and develop a set of ethical principles 
for NIH-funded researchers to follow when using AI 
(Figure 6).
30 Advances in data science facilitate data 
processing and sharing, but concomitantly raise 
concerns regarding privacy, security, ethics, and 
bias. NIH is proactively engaging data and computer 
scientists, engineers, clinicians, research participants, 
ethicists, and the public in its plans to address future 
challenges and opportunities.
Studies 

--- PAGE 17 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
7
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
processes.31,32 The U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) also approved the first automated medical 
device to use AI to detect diabetic retinopathy.33 NIH 
will continue to explore and expand further uses of AI.
Understanding Biological, Behavioral, and 
Social Determinants of Population Health
Building the foundation for science includes con-
structing an overall picture of how physiological, 
behavioral, and social factors alone and in combi-
nation may determine human health. Conditions in 
which an individual is born, lives, learns, works, and 
ages combined with the behaviors that they engage 
in can affect a wide range of health outcomes.
34 
Understanding how these factors interact with an 
individual’s biological make-up is a vital area of 
research. The epigenome consists of chemical com-
pounds and proteins that can attach to DNA and turn 
genes on and off. These changes in gene expression 
can occur in response to social experiences (both 
positive and negative) and environmental exposures 
and may be passed from one generation to the 
next. NIH supports research on social epigenomics, 
the study of how social experiences throughout a 
person’s lifetime can affect biology and health status 
through changes to the epigenome. Similarly, NIH 
supports research on environmental epigenomics, 
which looks at how an individual’s exposure to 
factors in the physical environment—such as air, 
water, and soil—may also impact gene expression. 
Studies designed to elucidate how social experiences 
and environmental exposures—such as those experi-
enced through structural racism and lower economic 
status—affect the individual epigenome among racial 
and ethnic groups can provide a unique opportunity 
to identify the changes that occur within and between 
populations. This knowledge can be used to increase 
understanding of minority health and decrease health 
disparities.
Social and behavioral research is crucial to under-
standing the health and developmental effects of 
using digital technology and electronic media that 
have become integral parts of daily life. Findings from 
the ABCD study and the NIH Intramural Research 
Program have demonstrated that a significant pro-
portion of children across a wide age range exceed 
the daily limits on screen time recommended by the 
American Academy of Pediatrics.
35,36 In light of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, screen time has dramatically 
increased for children of all ages, the effects of which 
will need to be investigated. To assess how technol-
ogy and media use affect early childhood health and 
development—as well as the nature of social inter -
actions among families, peers, and society—NIH will 
support an initiative to study the impact of technology 
and media exposure on early childhood development 
and health outcomes. This effort will support coor-
dinated research projects using existing and newly 
collected data, as well as determining measures for 
exposure, usage, development, and health outcomes, 
including neuroimaging, language development, 
physical activity, and hormone levels. 
Integrating different types of research to address 
health needs for specific populations can improve 
the health of these populations and also provide 
insights into common conditions. For example, Down 
syndrome is the most common genetic disease of 
mild to moderate intellectual disability, occurring in 
1 out of every 700 babies born in the U.

--- PAGE 18 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
8
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
and treat disease. Over 
the next 5 years, NIH 
will continue to invest in 
fundamental research 
projects that provide 
new insights into basic 
biological, behavioral, 
and social processes 
across the spectrum—
from molecules to cells to 
humans to communities. 
These investments will 
undoubtedly lay the 
groundwork for unimag-
inable breakthroughs 
that will lead NIH one 
step closer to improving 
human health.
Preventing 
Disease and 
Promoting 
Health
Disease prevention and health promotion are core 
components of NIH’s research mission to improve 
the health of all Americans. NIH research strengthens 
the evidence base on which national public health 
objectives and related disease prevention and health 
promotion strategies are built. Prevention research 
targets biological, social, and environmental factors, 
individual behaviors, and health services and informs 
health-related guidelines, policies, and regulations. 
NIH supports a broad portfolio of research that 
examines the best way to bring effective disease 
prevention and health promotion strategies into 
communities. 
Developing New and Improved Vaccines 
Vaccines provide a safe, cost-effective, and efficient 
means of preventing illness, disability, and death from 
infectious diseases. NIH supports a comprehensive 
spectrum of immunology and infectious disease 
research focused on developing improved or novel 
vaccines. This includes study of pathogen–host 
interactions and technological advancements in 
vaccine development that have led to innovative and 
exciting vaccine research strategies. For example, 
NIH-supported researchers are working to identify 
new platforms to deliver vaccine components and 
explore how adjuvants (i.e., vaccine components that 
enhance the immune 
response) affect the 
potency, durability, and 
other aspects of vac-
cine-induced 
 
immunity.37
An important remaining 
need is the rapid 
development of new 
vaccines to mitigate 
emerging infectious 
disease outbreaks, such 
as COVID-19, Ebola 
virus disease (EVD), and 
influenza (flu). NIH, in 
collaboration with its 
industry partner, devel-
oped an experimental 
vaccine for COVID-19 
in just weeks using 
the genetic sequence 
of SARS-CoV-2 (i.e., 
the virus that causes 
COVID-19).
38 As of late 2020, the vaccine co-devel-
oped by scientists at NIH and Moderna was granted 
an Emergency Use Authorization by the FDA, after 
rigorously testing its safety and ability to protect 
against infection. Other vaccines are still being 
tested.
39 Recent outbreaks of the Ebola virus spurred 
the development of multiple vaccine candidates 
for EVD, including the rVSV-ZEBOV vaccine, which 
through significant federal government support was 
brought to market by the private sector, licensed 
in 2019, and is now widely available.
40 Preliminary 
data from an outbreak in the Democratic Republic 
of the Congo (DRC) has shown that this vaccine is 
highly effective in preventing disease and death.
41 In 
the U.S., seasonal influenza causes 12,000–61,000 
deaths annually,
42 and emerging influenza strains 
pose a pandemic risk. A key focus of the NIH 
influenza research program is developing a universal 
vaccine
43 that provides robust, long-lasting protection 
against multiple subtypes of influenza (Figure 8), 
eliminating the need for a seasonal flu vaccine each 
year and providing protection against newly emerging 
strains with pandemic potential. Severa

--- PAGE 19 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
9
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
In addition to furthering the development of vaccines 
against specific pathogens, NIH supports the devel-
opment of technologies that enable scientists to 
apply a standardized manufacturing process to devel-
op candidate vaccines against various pathogens and 
create a collective database with information on their 
safety. This streamlined approach can shorten the 
preclinical development period from years to months 
and is important for rapid response to emerging 
infectious disease threats. 
Addressing Risk and Burden of Disease
NIH is committed to supporting research to reduce 
the impact of disease by identifying and improving 
understanding of risk factors (e.g., inadequate 
nutrition, low physical activity, built environment, 
tobacco use, alcohol or drug misuse) and protective 
factors (e.g., weight management, regular exercise, 
daily tooth brushing and flossing) alone and in 
combination with genetic factors. An important goal 
of prevention is to alter the balance between risk and 
protective factors so that protective factors outweigh 
risk factors. Screening, health promotion, counsel-
ing, behavioral change, stress management, and 
preventive medications are all potential strategies for 
reducing individual risk. NIH investments have helped 
lead to advances in screening for cardiovascular 
disease, lung cancer, abnormal blood glucose, type 2 
diabetes, oral cancer, and intimate partner violence, 
as well as interventions to address obesity and 
tobacco use in children and adolescents. 
One example of NIH’s investments in risk identifi-
cation is in suicide prevention (Figure 9). Suicide 
remains one of the top 10 leading causes of death 
in the U.S., claiming the lives of more than 48,000 
people each year.
45 Although it impacts all ages 
and in all parts of the country, some specific groups 
are disproportionately affected, such as sexual 
and gender minority (SGM) populations (especially 
transgender and gender non-conforming youth) 
and American Indian or Alaska Native populations 
(who have the highest suicide rates of any racial or 
ethnic group in the U.S.
46). NIH-supported suicide 
prevention research illustrates how improvements in 
care can save lives. Universal screening for suicide 
risk in emergency departments has been shown 
to be effective and feasible.
47 Building on these 
findings, NIH-supported researchers are testing brief 
interventions and follow-up care to prevent recurring 
self-harm and related comorbidities, such as sub-
stance use disorder. 
NIH-supported studies have demonstrated how long-
term, multigenerational studies of chronic diseases 
can give rise to innovative prevention and intervention 
strategies. For example, the Framingham Heart 
Study,
48 launched in 1948, continues to inform tobac-
co cessation, nutrition, physical activity, and blood 
pressure control strategies that are used all over the 
world to reduce the risk of chronic disease. High 
blood pressure, or hypertension, is common over 
the age of 50 years and is a leading risk factor for 
cardiovascular diseases like heart disease and stroke. 
It may also increase the risk of dementia later in life. 
Data from several NIH-funded observational studies 
suggested that cardiovascular disease risk increases 
when systolic blood pressure rises beyond a certain 
level. NIH’s Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial 
(SPRINT)
49 assessed whether aggressively lowering 
blood p

--- PAGE 20 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
10
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Harnessing Technology to Inform  
Decision-Making 
NIH supports the development of new or improved 
interventions and technologies along with repur-
posing existing technologies to monitor and reduce 
disease risk, enhance protective factors, and restore 
health (Figure 10). Coupled with advances in data 
science that enhance analytical capacity and speed, 
these technologies and tools will help aid decision-
 
making by patients and providers and improve 
disease pr
evention and health promotion strategies 
at the individual, family, community, and population 
health levels.
Most information used to make decisions in current 
medical practice is collected at a specific moment 
in time and in a clinical setting, such as taking blood 
pressure, providing a limited view of an individual’s 
health and disease risk. Heart rate and motion 
sensors in smart watches and other wearable devices 
are examples of consumer technologies that can 
provide continuous feedback to help people improve 
their health. These devices detect underlying signs 
of illness and response to interventions, including 
medications and lifestyle changes, faster than con-
ventional methods that often require weeks or months 
to provide actionable feedback. NIH-supported 
researchers have developed a wearable sensor made 
of stretchable microelectronics that uses ultrasound 
to measure blood pressure continuously, whether the 
wearer is resting or active. Such devices may help 
identify people at risk of stroke and heart disease by 
Figure 9. Suicide Prevention       
“Five action steps for helping someone in emotional pain”: Infographic.
Credit: NIMH, NIH.
Figure 10. Nanorobots for Dental Health      
NIH supported a collaboration among biomedical 
researchers and engineers to build microscopic 
nanorobots to target, destroy, and remove dental 
plaque, a harmful community of bacteria that grow on 
teeth. The nanorobots, which contain an antibacterial 
compound, are controlled using tiny magnets to 
perform micro-scale precision cleaning, including 
hard-to-reach spaces. This technology could be used 
to prevent dental caries and periodontal disease, in 
addition to cleaning other surfaces susceptible to 
biofilms, such as metal implants and catheters or 
hospital equipment. 
Credit: Geelsu Hwang and Edward Steager, University of Pennsylvania.


--- PAGE 21 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
11
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
providing patients and physicians with more frequent 
and accessible information on blood pressure, includ-
ing fluctuations that occur during the wide variety of 
activities that people engage in every day.
53 
Designing Research for Everyone 
NIH prioritizes research that addresses the needs of 
underserved populations to address the factors that 
contribute to health disparities. NIH-wide efforts will 
continue to focus on developing and testing interven-
tions to reduce health disparities, identifying key gaps 
in prevention science related to health disparities, 
and promoting targeted research on appropriately 
tailored public health, clinical, and community pre-
ventive services in diverse settings and contexts. For 
example, the NIH All of Us Research Program
54 has 
been designed to reflect the diversity of the U.S., with 
a special focus on including participants from groups 
that have been underrepresented in health research 
(Figure 11). 
The Collaborative Minority Health and Health 
Disparities Research with Tribal Epidemiology 
Centers initiative supports research on topics related 
to minority health and health disparities in American 
Indian or Alaska Native populations, with emphasis 
on areas where there are significant gaps in data and 
knowledge. Current research projects include exam-
ining the impact of the Navajo Nation Tax on Junk 
Food on health outcomes, identifying the incidence 
and prevalence of arthritis and autoimmune disease 
among Alaska Natives, and understanding determi-
nants of motor vehicle injuries and deaths among the 
Northwest Tribes.
55 
Sex and gender also influence health and disease. 
Sex refers to biological dif
ferences between females 
and males, including chromosomes, sex organs, 
and endogenous hormonal profiles. Gender refers to 
socially constructed and enacted roles and behaviors, 
which occur in a historical and cultural context and 
vary across societies and over time.
56 Considering 
the effects of sex and gender in study design, data 
collection and analysis, and dissemination of findings 
will help to inform the development of prevention 
strategies and interventions for everyone.
Developing and Optimizing 
Treatments, Interventions,  
and Cures
Building on the solid foundation of fundamental dis-
coveries in biology, health and disease, and behavior, 
as well as innovations in data science and emerging 
technologies, NIH-supported scientists continue to 
develop new and improved treatments and cures, 
including for diseases that were considered intracta-
ble even a decade ago. 
The path to a new treatment often begins not in the 
clinic or community but in the laboratory, where basic 
researchers refine our understanding of disease and 
identify aspects of disease causation or progression 
Figure 11. All of Us Research Program        
The NIH All of Us Research Program is a historic effort 
to collect and study data from 1 million or more people 
living in the U.S. The program’s goal is better health 
for all of us, and its aim is to gather data on genetics, 
lifestyle, and environmental exposures. The All of Us 
Research Program is unique because it is disease 
agnostic, meaning that it will not focus on one disease, 
risk factor, or group of people, instead enabling 
researchers to evaluate multiple risk factors that are 
associated with outcomes across different diseases. 
This unprecedented scientific resource will enabl

--- PAGE 22 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
12
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
that could be targeted therapeutically. Investigators 
use this information to design candidate treatment 
approaches using cell or tissue samples, animal 
models, or computer simulations. If the candidate 
approaches appear to be safe and effective in this 
preclinical setting, they are moved into human trials, 
where they are tested for safety and efficacy. Finally, 
new and improved methods to promote the adoption 
of effective and proven interventions are identified 
and refined through implementation research. This 
process is rarely straightforward. In fact, sometimes 
the process even circles back on itself in a “virtuous 
cycle,” with applied research informing new ideas in 
basic research.
To illustrate, NIH-supported basic science was a 
springboard for the development of a ground-breaking 
new cystic fibrosis treatment. Cystic fibrosis is an 
inherited disorder that causes mucus to accumulate 
in the airways and digestive tract. The identification 
of the CFTR gene, which is mutated in affected 
individuals, along with additional discoveries over 
several decades, has enabled a variety of progressively 
more effective drug therapies for the disease. Recent 
NIH-supported clinical trials demonstrated that a 
novel triple-drug therapy could compensate for the 
effects of a CFTR mutation that occurs in 90 percent 
of affected individuals.
57 Now, instead of being a fatal 
disease, there is promise that cystic fibrosis in many 
individuals could soon be a chronic condition that can 
be managed over a long lifetime. 
NIH supports randomized controlled clinical 
trials—studies conducted under “ideal” research 
conditions in which participants are randomly placed 
into one of two or more groups that receive different 
interventions or a placebo (i.e., a treatment with 
no therapeutic effect). Outcomes from each group 
are then analyzed and compared. Such studies 
are considered the gold standard by which clinical 
researchers determine the safety and effectiveness 
of interventions. NIH also supports pragmatic trials, 
which are designed to evaluate interventions in 
real-world settings and situations. To support and 
facilitate pragmatic trials, NIH established a Health 
Care Systems Research Collaboratory
58 under the 
NIH Common Fund to engage with health care 
delivery organizations as key research partners. The 
Collaboratory disseminates best research practices, 
provides education and coordination, and supports 
pilot projects involving a variety of diseases and 
conditions in community settings.
Giving the Right Treatment to the Right 
Patient at the Right Time
Advances in molecular medicine have allowed health 
professionals to move toward a precision medicine 
approach for targeted treatment and prevention that 
considers an individual’s genes, environment, and 
lifestyle. In contrast to a one-size-fits-all approach, 
in which disease treatment and prevention strategies 
are developed for the average person, precision 
medicine will allow doctors and researchers to predict 
more accurately which treatment and prevention 
strategies will work best in an individual. Unlike 
research studies that focus on one disease, risk 
factor, or group of people, the All of Us Research 
Program is building an unprecedented scientific 
resource that will enable research on numerous 
diseases and conditions across populations and the 
lifespan. 
Patients with certain types of cancer are

--- PAGE 23 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
13
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Another area of NIH-supported research on per-
sonalized approaches to medical treatment has 
been to develop artificial pancreas technologies to 
automatically link individualized glucose monitoring 
and insulin delivery to improve the health and quality 
of life of people with type 1 diabetes (Figure 12). In 
the 1.6 million Americans estimated to have type 1 
diabetes, the immune 
system destroys the 
pancreatic insulin-
 
producing cells, leaving 
the body unable to 
absorb or use glucose. 
Significant progress 
towar
d artificial pancre-
as technologies—which 
consist of a continuous 
glucose monitor, an 
insulin pump, and a 
computer algorithm 
that, in some cases, 
can be run from the 
user’s smartphone—
has been made through 
extensive collaboration 
among NIH ICs, 
other federal agencies, 
private funders, academic investigators, and industry. 
In 2016, the FDA approved the first commercial 
hybrid artificial pancreas device
62 and in 2019, the 
FDA approved the first interoperable system63 that 
could give patients the ability to choose the individual 
components that work best for them. Studies have 
shown that these technologies result in better con-
trol of blood glucose levels compared to standard 
treatment, potentially lowering the risk of diabetic 
complications.
64 NIH continues to support research to 
develop next-generation and novel devices that are 
smaller, easier to use, and available to all.
Catalyzing Cell Engineering, 
Bioengineering, and Regenerative 
Medicine
NIH is at the forefront of remarkable technological 
advances, such as innovations in cell engineering, 
bioengineering, and regenerative medicine. These 
advances are not only accelerating research but 
also creating the possibility of new treatments that 
previous generations of clinicians could only imagine. 
For example, scientists supported by the NIH BRAIN 
Initiative
®65 have pioneered a new technology that 
converts brain signals into audible speech—a poten-
tially life-altering breakthrough for individuals who 
are unable to speak due to a stroke, injury, or other 
neurological condition. Next, researchers will design 
a clinical trial involving paralyzed, speech-impaired 
participants to determine how to best gather brain 
signal data, which can then be used to refine the 
previously trained com-
puter algorithm.
Biotechnology is bringing 
us closer to a cure for 
AMD, a leading cause of 
visual impairment among 
older Americans. By 2050, 
the estimated number 
of people with AMD is 
expected to more than 
double from 2 million to 
 
5 million.66 The discovery 
of induced pluripotent 
stem cells (iPSCs)—adult 
cells that have been 
genetically reprogrammed 
to a developmental stage 
such that they can be 
turned into any cell type in 
the body—opened the door for transformative regen-
erative medicine therapies. Researchers at NIH were 
able to derive iPSCs from participants with advanced 
AMD and convert them into healthy retinal tissue. The 
newly developed tissue replaced damaged tissue and 
prevented blindness in animal models.
67 NIH received 
FDA approval to begin the first-ever clinical trial using 
replacement tissue derived from iPSCs in humans.
68
Therapeutic development for many human diseases 
and conditions could become faster and more 
accurate due to the expanding use of tissue chips, 
or “organs-on-chips.” These devices consist of 
3-D platforms that support living human tis

--- PAGE 24 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
14
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
exposed to reduced gravity,70 which models aging 
in an accelerated manner (Figure 13). Researchers 
are also developing interconnected tissue chips that 
could model the entire human body’s response to 
candidate therapeutics and are being deployed to 
address emerging health challenges, such as the 
opioid crisis and COVID-19 pandemic. In addition,  
current efforts are focused on the use of tissue chips 
to inform the implementation of clinical trials.
Meeting Emerging Public Health Needs
A critical focus of the NIH mission is readiness to 
address new and emerging public health needs 
rapidly, comprehensively, and efficiently. From the 
emergence of HIV/AIDS in the 1980s to the more 
recent outbreaks of infectious diseases—such as 
Zika virus disease, EVD, and COVID-19—to con-
ducting research during an unfolding disaster like 
the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, NIH has been at the 
forefront of the global research response. NIH’s role in 
combatting emerging threats involves identifying and 
understanding the responsible pathogens and their 
effects on the body, treating affected patients in the 
NIH Clinical Center as part of research studies, and 
conducting and supporting clinical trials throughout 
the nation and around the world.
The NIH Clinical Center is specially equipped with 
high-level respiratory isolation capabilities to handle 
patients with highly infectious diseases. In addition, 
the staff includes infectious disease and critical 
care specialists who have received training in strict 
infection control practices to prevent the spread of 
potentially transmissible agents. The Special Clinical 
Studies Unit is used for cutting-edge investigational 
clinical studies and treatments, ranging from EVD to 
universal influenza vaccine studies to treating patients 
affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
71
NIH can also swiftly mobilize its flexible infrastructure 
and collaborative research partnerships to help 
advance new and promising treatments, even in areas 
of armed conflict and tenuous security. NIH and the 
Institute of Biomedical Research in the DRC conduct-
ed the Pamoja Tulinde Maisha (PALM) clinical trial, 
meaning “Together Save Lives,” in Kiswahili. The pre-
liminary results were so compelling that the trial was 
halted, and the results were promptly made public to 
help save lives and stem the latest EVD outbreak.
72 
All EVD patients in the DRC treatment centers are 
now treated with one of two treatment options based 
on the PALM trial results. Through this collaborative 
research conducted in a region of civil unrest during 
an ongoing outbreak, the U.S. and its partners have 
provided the world with two new effective treatments 
for an emerging disease. Additionally, this experience 
demonstrated the efficacy of promising therapeutics 
to treat EVD and serves as a potential guide for 
conducting future clinical trials in outbreak settings.
NIH’s role in safeguarding the public health extends 
beyond infectious disease. For example, at this 
writing, opioid misuse and addiction continues to be 
a rapidly evolving U.S. public health crisis. Although 
more than 50 million Americans suffer from chronic 
pain, safe non-opioid options for pain manage-
ment are unavailable.
73 In 2018, more than 46,000 
Americans died of opioid overdose, making it one 
of the most common causes of non-disease-related 
deaths for adolescents and young adults.
74 More 
than 2 millio

--- PAGE 25 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
15
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Partnering to Advance Treatments  
and Cures
Collaboration is essential to accelerating progress 
in developing effective prevention and treatment 
interventions, as well as ensuring that the benefits of 
research are available to all Americans. For example, 
the Partnership for Access to Clinical Trials is a col-
laborative effort that connects health care providers 
and their patients in the Washington, D.C., metropol-
itan area to NIH researchers conducting clinical trials 
at the NIH Clinical Center.
76 By serving as a bridge 
between research participants, their health care 
providers, and NIH researchers, this program serves 
as a successful model for increasing diversity in 
research participation, particularly among those who 
are underrepresented in clinical trials, and expanding 
access to the benefits of NIH research.
NIH facilitates collaboration with industry and federal 
partners to advance treatment science. In 2017, in 
collaboration with 12 leading biopharmaceutical 
companies and advocacy organizations, NIH 
launched the Partnership for Accelerating Cancer 
Therapies,
77 a 5-year public–private research collabo-
ration, as part of Cancer MoonshotSM. The initial focus 
of the partnership is the development, validation, 
and standardization of biomarkers to better predict 
response to immunotherapy—a type of biological 
therapy that turns on or off the immune system 
to help the body fight cancer, infection, and other 
diseases. Immunotherapies have resulted in dramatic 
clinical benefit in certain types of cancer; however, 
existing immunotherapies do not work for all patients 
and are associated with substantial toxicity in some 
individuals.
78 A better understanding of why immu-
notherapies work in some patients and not others is 
needed to help target this treatment to the people 
most likely to benefit. 
NIH is also transforming treatment of sickle cell dis-
ease (SCD) through collaborations (Figure 15). SCD 
is a group of inherited disorders characterized by the 
buildup of an abnormal protein in red blood cells. 
It can cause pain, fatigue, and damage to organs 
throughout the body. People of African ancestry have 
the highest prevalence of SCD; it is estimated that the 
disease affects up to 100,000 Americans.
79 Although 
treatments are available to relieve symptoms and 
extend lifespan, a bone marrow transplant is currently 
the only cure for SCD.
80 Unfortunately, a transplant 
is not feasible for most patients, because it requires 
bone marrow from an immune-matched sibling. 
In 2016, NIH established the Sickle Cell Disease 
Implementation Consortium (SCDIC), the first 
Figure 14. HEAL InitiativeSM
The NIH Helping to End Addiction Long-termSM Initiative, 
or NIH HEAL InitiativeSM, launched in April 2018, is an 
aggressive NIH-wide effort to provide scientific solutions 
to the national opioid overdose crisis, including improved 
treatment strategies for both pain and opioid use disorder. 
Notably, a series of highly focused studies has been 
launched to accelerate the development of new medica-
tions to treat all aspects of opioid use disorder, from new 
formulations of existing drugs to creating new therapies 
aimed at novel targets to novel devices for the treatment of 
substance use disorder and pain. Working across scientific 
disciplines and care settings, the NIH HEAL Initiative seeks 
to match the seriousness of the crisis and offers new hope 
for 

--- PAGE 26 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
16
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
research program to use implementation science—
the scientific study of how best to ensure the uptake 
of evidence-based practice—to identify and address 
barriers to quality care in SCD.
81 The SCDIC has 
created a registry of more than 2,400 patients. In 
2018, NIH established the Cure Sickle Cell Initiative, 
an innovative collaboration among researchers in 
academia and industry, clinicians, patients, and 
advocates to identify and support the most promising 
genetic therapies for SCD.
82 Their goal is to bring new 
therapies to the point of FDA approval within the next 
5–10 years. 
NIH facilitates collaboration on complex scientific 
questions requiring the intersection of disciplines, 
methodologies, and knowledge by supporting a 
variety of funding mechanisms that are focused on 
collaborative or team-based work. Such opportunities 
for investigator-initiated research extend from serving 
as co-primary investigators on a grant award to 
participating in highly complex networks of investiga-
tors and institutions charged with advancing science 
in new directions. NIH looks forward to reaping the 
scientific benefits of continuing and expanding its 
partnerships in the next 5 years.
Developing, Maintaining, and Renewing Scientific 
Research Capacity
2OBJECTIVE
NIH not only funds innovative biomedical and 
behavioral research but also pursues its mission by 
ensuring that the biomedical research workforce is 
well trained and diverse and conducts its work within 
an infrastructure that enables groundbreaking results 
at a rapid pace. Over the next 5 years, NIH is poised 
to enhance its support of research capacity to max-
imize the potential of the research that the agency 
sustains.
Enhancing the Biomedical and 
Behavioral Research Workforce
NIH recognizes that its mission will be met only 
through the continued efforts of a talented and ded-
icated biomedical research workforce. The strength 
of the NIH workforce depends on its sustainability 
and diversity (Figure 16), which NIH supports through 
both intramural and extramural focused training 
programs.
Sustainability is achieved by maintaining an appro-
priate balance of researchers at different career 
stages, ensuring that investigators early in their 
careers are given every opportunity to excel, even 
in times of limited funding. Intense competition for 
funding can pose a challenge for researchers trying 
to embark upon and sustain independent research 
careers. NIH’s Next Generation Researchers Initiative 
(NGRI) aims to enhance opportunities for early-stage 
researchers by prioritizing funding of independent 
research applications for investigators who are within 
10 years of completing postgraduate clinical training 
or their highest advanced research degree.
83 Through 
this initiative, NIH has more than doubled the number 
of early-stage researchers supported—from less 
than 600 in 2013 to 1,316 in 2019. Moving forward, 
NIH will continue to explore novel approaches to 
expand pathways for funding early-stage researchers 
and assess how NGRI policies affect women and 
individuals from groups that are underrepresented in 
biomedical and behavioral sciences.
To encourage early-stage researchers to explore new 
research avenues, NIH recently created the Stephen 
Figure 16. Minority Women in Science
Alma Levant Hayden was one of the first minority 
women scientists in the federal government and worked 
at NIH as a bio

--- PAGE 27 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
17
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Ira Katz Award, in memory of the longtime director of 
the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal 
and Skin Diseases. This award is designed to support 
earlystage researchers who propose innovative and 
unique ideas that represent a significant change in 
research direction from their past research or training 
experience.
Ground-breaking, impactful biomedical and 
behavioral research depends upon a diverse 
workforce, composed of people trained in multiple 
disciplines and from different backgrounds, who 
can provide a richness of perspectives necessary to 
inspire new ideas. Recognizing the need to advance 
talent in muchneeded fields of study, NIH supports 
training programs in a wide variety of areas, such as 
bioinformatics, scientific rigor and reproducibility, 
 
and data science. To illustrate, NIH supports  
16 University-based Biomedical Informatics and Data 
Science Training Programs,
84 including more than  
200 Ph.D.- and postdoctoral-level researchers. 
Notably
, NIH also partners with high schools, 
minority-serving institutions, and others to support 
bioinformatics training. 
Given the role that interdisciplinary approaches 
and team science play in fostering innovation, NIH 
has developed a number of initiatives to encourage 
collaborative research. One such example is NIH’s 
Building Interdisciplinary Research Careers in 
Women’s Health (BIRCWH), which connects junior 
and senior faculty with shared interests in interdis-
ciplinary research on women’s health.
85 Since 2000, 
BIRCWH has helped more than 700 junior faculty 
pursue their career goals, thereby expanding the 
pipeline of women’s health researchers and benefiting 
the health of women.
NIH supports numerous programs designed to foster 
research environments that encourage participa-
tion from a full and diverse range of talent. NIH’s 
Maximizing Opportunities for Scientific and Academic 
Independent Careers (MOSAIC) program
86 facilitates 
the transition of promising postdoctoral researchers 
from diverse backgrounds, including those from 
underrepresented groups, to academic faculty 
positions at institutions throughout the country. The 
Native American Research Internship (NARI) program 
supports diverse student researchers, including 
American Indian and Alaskan Native students, 
from across the country in paid summer research 
internships. NARI researchers benefit from cultural 
and professional mentorship from American Indian or 
Alaskan Native elders, community organizations, and 
renowned faculty scientists. 
Reflective of the high priority that NIH places on 
workforce diversity, the NIH Common Fund manages 
several training programs targeted on diversity. 
Launched in 2014, the Enhancing the Diversity of 
the NIHFunded Workforce Program
87 (also called 
the Diversity Program Consortium or DPC) encour-
ages the inclusion of talent across the career span. 
Through integrated initiatives, DPC has supported 
thousands of trainees in biomedical and behavioral 
research careers by providing funding for institu-
tional infrastructure, student support, and research 
mentoring. Within 4 years of launch, 1,116 students 
were appointed to research-training positions through 
DPC’s Building Infrastructure Leading to Diversity 
(BUILD) program, with 68 percent of BUILD students 
from underrepresented groups.
88 Moreover, half 
of DPC member institutions (59 of 113) are either 
historically Black

--- PAGE 28 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'research areas'] ---
18
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
working group ensures that the unique career barriers 
faced by women of color are addressed.
Public health needs extend far beyond geographical 
borders. For example, deadly infectious diseases, 
such as EVD and COVID-19, can spread rapidly 
across international borders and continents. 
Recognizing that scientific research capacity is not 
equally distributed across the globe, potentially 
hampering the ability to combat such challenges, NIH 
develops international training programs. One such 
program, the Global Infectious Disease Research 
Training Program, builds infectious disease expertise 
and research capacity across the world and has 
prepared more than 1,200 researchers to conduct 
independent and locally relevant infectious disease 
research in their home countries.
93 The program 
connects U.S. institutions with institutions in low- and 
middle-income countries to provide degree programs, 
trainings, workshops, and mentoring on topics related 
to infectious diseases. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has also shown the need 
for local epidemiological modeling capability to 
provide actionable information for policy makers to 
make public health decisions during outbreaks. NIH 
builds capacity for in-country analysis of COVID-19 
in low- and middle-income countries by training 
modelers to track and analyze the progress of the 
pandemic. These activities include longstanding NIH 
partners who have well-established epidemiological 
and surveillance sites in Africa, South America, and 
South Asia, but lack analytical capacity. 
Supporting Research Resources 
and Infrastructure
For the biomedical research workforce to succeed 
in moving discovery forward, it requires a scientific 
infrastructure that is expansive, durable, and capable 
of quickly integrating state-of-the-art resources that 
are available to all. To achieve this goal, NIH devel-
ops a number of programs and policies designed 
to provide the biomedical research workforce with 
stability and flexibility, broad access to innovations 
in tools and technologies, materials, and knowledge 
repositories necessary for the design of impactful 
research programs (Figure 17).
NIH’s support of modern technology platforms and 
high-performance computing capabilities enables 
innovation in scientific research in several areas, 
particularly genomics, computational chemistry, and 
cryo-electron microscopy imaging. Cryo-electron 
microscopy is a cutting-edge technology that enables 
researchers to determine the structures of biological 
molecules to identify therapeutic targets for vaccines 
and drugs. NIH Common Fund’s Transformative High 
Resolution Cryo-Electron Microscopy program
94 
aims to broaden access to cryo-electron microscopy 
through the support of national service centers, 
improvement of technology, and training. 
NIH is also investing in the data infrastructure neces-
sary to accommodate rapid advances in biomedical 
and behavioral research. Research progress has 
produced an explosion of human health data that 
exceeds current abilities to capture and interpret 
them (Figure 18). To promote data sharing in high-
priority research areas, NIH creates a number of 
different data repositories. For example, NIH has built 
a data repository to maximize publication availability 
and data sharing for NIH HEAL Initiative
SM research 
projects.95 This effort promotes dissemination of new 
knowledge, enhances reproducibility, and w

--- PAGE 29 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
19
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Much of NIH’s efforts in resource building focuses on 
providing researchers with the underlying evidence 
needed to design impactful research programs. 
These efforts include the development of resources 
for understanding public health needs of the general 
population and specific populations, resources that 
will assist in providing access to patient populations, 
and resources for better understanding the factors 
affecting such health conditions as Alzheimer’s 
disease and related dementias (Figure 19).
A widely available tool in which NIH invests to help 
guide prevention and treatment efforts is the Global 
Burden of Disease (GBD) enterprise.
97 GBD is the 
world’s largest scientific effort to systematically 
quantify health loss from all diseases, injuries, and 
risk factors by age, sex, and geographic location over 
time. NIH and GBD collaborated to improve the way 
that disease causes and risk factors are identified. 
As a result of this collaboration, NIH and the research 
community can identify and track the causes and 
 
risk factors of premature death and disability in the 
U.S. over time (both historically and pr
ojecting up 
to 25 years in the future). Because premature death 
is often preventable, the availability of these data 
not only improves understanding of the burden of 
disease and key health outcomes in the U.S., but also 
enhances the ability to focus on the most pressing 
health challenges facing the nation.
The ability to monitor cancer in the U.S. is an import-
ant step toward determining how best to prevent and 
treat cancer in specific, disproportionately affected 
populations. The NIH Surveillance, Epidemiology, and 
End Results (SEER)
98 Program provides information 
on cancer statistics based on race, gender, and 
geography to guide efforts to reduce the cancer 
burden among the U.S. population. SEER currently 
reflects 35 percent of the U.S. population, and NIH 
Figure 18. Modern Data Environments to Accelerate Research 
Rapid advances in data generation and computing 
power provide extraordinary potential for accelerating 
biomedical research. However, researchers face technical 
hurdles to accessing, sharing, and analyzing within and 
across large biomedical datasets. NIH is tackling this 
challenge through multiple initiatives to build modern 
technology platforms, collaborative workspaces, tools, 
and applications necessary for researchers to securely 
find, access, share, store, and analyze data across diverse 
datasets. Two examples are the Genomic Data Science 
Analysis, Visualization, and Informatics Lab-space and the 
Cancer Research Data Commons. These platforms enable 
researchers to efficiently combine and analyze diverse 
data types, which can lead to new discoveries in disease 
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment. Several programs 
seek to provide researchers with state-of-the-art, high-
performance computing, such as the Biowulf cluster, which 
is the world’s most powerful supercomputer completely 
dedicated to advancing biomedical and behavioral research. 
Credit: Ernesto del Aguila III, NHGRI, NIH.
Figure 19. Alzheimer’s Disease Research  
Infrastructure
More than 5.8 million Americans age 65 and older are 
living with Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the most common 
form of dementia. Many others younger than age 65 
have developed the less common early-onset form of 
AD. Still more are affected by AD-related dementias 
(ADRDs). Althoug

--- PAGE 30 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
20
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
As a steward of public resources, NIH has a respon-
sibility to uphold public trust and confidence in the 
agency. In addition to fostering innovative research, 
NIH must endeavor to ensure that all of its operations 
and the research it supports are conducted efficiently, 
responsibly, ethically, and with integrity. Over the next 
will expand the program to cover 50 percent of the 
U.S. population. 
The medical advances and new technologies that 
have allowed Americans to live longer and healthier 
lives have not helped everyone equally. To build 
capacity at institutions with a historical and cur-
rent commitment to educating underrepresented 
students and providing health care in underserved 
communities, NIH created the Research Centers in 
Minority Institutions (RCMI) Program.
99 The goals of 
RCMIs are to enhance institutional research capacity, 
enable investigators to become more successful in 
obtaining competitive funding, foster environments 
conducive to career enhancement, promote research 
on minority health and health disparities, and estab-
lish sustainable relationships with community-based 
organizations.
100 
NIH is also working to promote health equity in rural 
populations. NIH’s Clinical and Translational Science 
Awards (CTSA) Program
101,102,103 is engaging with 
patients, community members, and nonprofit orga-
nizations to develop and disseminate best practices 
for patient-focused research in rural health.
104 Project 
areas include improving access to clinical trials for 
rural communities, harnessing technology to deliver 
effective care, and enhancing rural community 
outreach. The CTSA Program is also partnering with 
other NIH ICs and federal agencies to support rural 
health.
To further support rural communities, NIH is har-
nessing the Institutional Development Award (IDeA) 
Program, which aims to broaden the geographic 
distribution of NIH funding and to build research 
capacity in states that historically have had low 
levels of NIH funding. NIH is building on the research 
capacity within IDeA states to help address the 
medical needs of children living in rural and under-
served areas. Similarly, the Environmental influences 
on Child Health Outcomes (ECHO) Program also 
leverages IDeA to expand pediatric research capacity 
in the IDeA States Pediatric Clinical Trials Network.
105 
Beginning in 2018, IDeA also collaborated with NIH’s 
Shared Instrumentation Grant (SIG) Programs to 
improve access to modern technologies for research-
ers in underresourced institutions in IDeA-eligible 
states. SIG supports the acquisition of modern 
scientific instruments that must be used on a shared 
basis.
106
Many NIH Common Fund projects focus on devel-
oping resources that can be useful for research 
communities focused on a particular topic. The NIH 
Common Fund Molecular Transducers of Physical 
Activity Consortium (MoTrPAC)
107,108 is building a map 
of the molecular responses to exercise, both imme-
diate and over the long term. Data are being made 
widely available to the entire research community so 
that investigators from anywhere can use this map 
to develop and test hypotheses about how exercise 
improves health and ameliorates disease. The pro-
gram is scheduled to run through 2023 and released 
its first dataset through the MoTrPAC Data Hub in 
2019.
Another valuable resource for the research communi-
ty includes improved understanding of the biol

--- PAGE 31 matched=['Scientific priorit', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
21
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
5 years, NIH is committed to taking additional steps 
to maintain and strengthen the processes by which it 
governs the conduct of science.
Fostering a Culture of Good 
Scientific Stewardship
This NIH-Wide Strategic Plan positions the agency to 
meet its mission by pursuing scientific opportunities 
when they arise, responding to ongoing and emerging 
public health needs, and addressing rare diseases. 
NIH research efforts also align with and reflect HHS’s 
priority goals.
110 The agency promotes policies and 
programs that foster and ensure a strong foundation 
and culture of good scientific stewardship. As critical 
research needs arise, NIH will respond by ensuring 
that the scientific community has flexibility to quickly 
adapt to and address urgent public health issues.
Setting Priorities
Scientific priority setting at NIH encourages input from 
a range of sources, including the research community; 
public forums; the Advisory Committee to the NIH 
Director; U.S. Congress; Administration objectives; 
and consultation with advocacy groups, professional 
societies, and research participants. The NIH Director 
provides overall leadership to the ICs and OD offices, 
especially on efforts involving several components of 
the agency. Strategic plans developed by individual 
ICs and OD offices, committees composed of repre-
sentatives from multiple ICs, and interagency working 
groups describe a multitude of scientific priorities and 
themes of interest to the agency.
111
NIH demonstrates effective stewardship by support-
ing the most meritorious biomedical and behavioral 
research possible. The NIH peer review process 
assesses research grant applications for overall 
scientific and technical merit and ensures that appli-
cations receive fair, independent, expert, and timely 
reviews.
112 Scientific review panels are strategically 
formed to include reviewers who possess both broad 
and specialized expertise and who can address 
stability and recent trends in the field. NIH makes 
efforts to ensure that review panels reflect diversity 
in career stage, geographic region, and demographic 
characteristics. NIH staff seek input from a variety 
of sources to identify reviewers for panels, including 
NIH program staff and advisory councils, as well 
as scientific literature, meetings, and professional 
organizations. 
The relative merit of applications as determined 
through peer review, in conjunction with input 
on mission relevance from IC Advisory Councils, 
informs IC Directors as they make funding decisions 
that consider mission focus, portfolio balance, 
scientific opportunity, emerging and ongoing public 
health needs, and stakeholder priorities. Balancing 
research with training and infrastructure—as well as 
distribution across basic, translational, and clinical 
research—are key factors taken into consideration 
in maintaining a diverse portfolio. NIH also considers 
the vital role of rare diseases research, through which 
unique biological insights are possible. This research 
is less likely to be supported by private funders than 
research into more prevalent disorders.
To maintain a peer review process of the highest 
caliber, NIH has developed an ongoing systematic 
multimethod evaluation that will objectively assess 
most peer review study sections over a 5-year 
cycle.
113 The aims of the system are to keep study 
sections aligned with the current state of the science, 
c

--- PAGE 32 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
22
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Another aspect of NIH stewardship is to provide the 
public with transparent and easily accessible informa-
tion about NIH research awards and allow interested 
individuals to monitor NIH’s support of research. 
The NIH Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools 
Expenditures and Results (NIH RePORTER)
115 tool, 
for example, provides public access to information 
on the grants, contracts, and intramural research 
that NIH supports. Additionally, the NIH Data Book
116 
provides quick access to key annual statistics, such 
as application success rates, workforce and training 
trends, the peer review process, and small business 
awardees. NIH will continue enhancing these and 
other tools in the suite of NIH RePORTER tools
117 to 
better meet information and communication needs in 
the coming years. 
Making Evidence-Informed Decisions
NIH is committed to enhancing scientific stewardship 
by optimizing approaches that generate evidence 
used to inform programmatic, operational, and 
policy decisions. To further these efforts, NIH has 
developed several tools, available to its staff and to 
the broader scientific community, that can identify 
and analyze current and emerging areas of research 
that will advance NIH’s mission. For example, the 
iCite
118 suite of tools is a public resource that enables 
users to examine validated metrics regarding the 
impact of NIH-funded research articles (Figure 20). 
These tools, which are informed by the judgment of 
subject-matter experts, help users examine the NIH 
portfolio’s productivity, balance, and priorities across 
the spectrum of research—from basic to clinical and 
across the diverse areas of biomedical and behavioral 
research.
NIH shares common interests with many agencies 
across the federal government and often coordinates 
with other science agencies to promote collabo-
ration among researchers and manage research 
portfolios. NIH supports Federal RePORTER,
119 a 
collaborative effort among federal funders to provide 
a central database for certain grant information. In 
addition, NIH is partnering with the National Science 
Foundation and the General Services Administration 
to develop and implement computational tools to 
identify overlap between grant proposals across 
agencies in real-time, reducing the risk of unnec-
essarily duplicative research.
120 Collectively, these 
efforts promote transparency and enable efficiency 
through data-driven decision-making.
Assessing Programs, Processes, 
Outcomes, and Impact
The NIH Report on Approaches to Assess the Value 
of Biomedical Research by NIH121 found that a better 
understanding of all aspects of NIH’s work is key 
to increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of the 
agency. NIH uses a variety of approaches—including 
monitoring, performance measurement, analysis, and 
evaluation—to assess the progress and effectiveness 
of its programs, policies, and operations and to 
generate information for decision-making. To increase 
the use of these tools, NIH is enhancing the quality 
of administrative data, making it an increasingly 
strategic source of information that, when coupled 
with other tools, could improve the agency’s 
Figure 20. Predicting Translational Progress of Research
Fundamental research can take 
decades to translate into clinical 
outcomes. To capture the trans-
lational potential of publications, 
NIH researchers created a machine 
learning model that maps papers o

--- PAGE 33 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
23
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
effectiveness. Under HHS’s guidance, NIH will 
engage in capacity- and evidence-building activities 
to support the Department’s implementation of the 
Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 
2018
122 and further develop its data-driven, results-
oriented culture.
Communicating Results 
NIH fosters scientific stewardship by ensuring that 
the products and processes of scientific research, 
such as research data and scientific publications, are 
available in accord with the FAIR principles that all 
research data should be findable, accessible, interop-
erable, and reusable (Figure 21). NIH communicates 
research findings to the public in numerous ways, 
including through press releases on recent scientific 
advances on the NIH News & Events
123 website, 
the NIH Director’s Blog,124 and the Impact of NIH 
Research pages,125 which have examples illustrating 
the downstream impact of NIH research on public 
health and society. Additionally, NIH ICs and OD offic-
es develop and disseminate a range of publicfriendly 
health- and disease-specific educational materials 
on a host of topics. NIH provides evidence-based 
and authoritative biomedical information in highly 
expeditious and proactive ways. This vital function is 
especially important during public health emergen-
cies, such as infectious disease or foodborne illness 
outbreaks.
Research results are also communicated through 
such NIH resources as PubMed and ClinicalTrials.
gov. In 2020, NIH launched the new PubMed,
126,127 
the most heavily used biomedical literature citation 
database in the world, which enables the commu-
nication and discovery of scientific literature around 
the world. NIH’s PubMed Central (PMC)
128 provides 
public access to the full text of more than 6 million 
peer-reviewed research articles (Figure 22). PMC 
facilitates linking between articles and associated 
data; supports discovery of these data by aggregat-
ing data citations, data availability statements, and 
supplementary materials; and contains a subset of 
about 3 million articles available for bulk retrieval for 
text mining and other research purposes. 
Reports from clinical studies are made available 
through ClinicalTrials.gov, the largest public clinical 
research registry and results database in the world. 
This NIH resource provides patients and their 
caregivers, health care providers, and researchers 
with information on more than 330,000 active and 
complete registered studies, including studies with 
summary results, many of which are not otherwise 
available through published literature. A multiyear 
effort is underway to modernize ClinicalTrials.gov to 
deliver an improved user experience on an updated 
platform that will accommodate growth and improve 
efficiency. 
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, NIH part-
nered with researchers and leaders from universities 
and industry to rapidly mobilize and create the 
COVID-19 Open Research Dataset (CORD-19)
129 of 
scholarly literature about COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, 
and other coronaviruses. CORD-19 provides 
immediate, machinereadable access to the full text 
of pre-print and peer-reviewed articles to assist 
researchers worldwide in finding answers to high-
 
priority scientific questions related to the COVID-19 
response. NIH also developed the COVID-19 portfolio 
tool
130 as a complement to CORD-19. This tool 
provides powerful search functionality and interactive 
Figure 

--- PAGE 34 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
24
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
visualizations to support cutting-edge analytics of  
the literature to identify gaps and opportunities in 
COVID-19-related r
esearch. In addition, to assist 
researchers working on the genomics of the novel 
coronavirus, the COVID-19 Genome Sequence 
Dataset on Registry of Open Data on Amazon Web 
Services
131 is a centralized sequence repository for 
strains of SARS-CoV-2.
Leveraging Partnerships
Expanding fundamental knowledge of biological 
systems and applying that knowledge to the 
advancement of health requires strategic partnerships 
with a range of organizations, including other federal 
agencies, international governments, the private 
sector, and the public. These partnerships bring 
enhanced coordination, critical expertise, pooled 
resources, and novel stakeholder connections to 
augment NIH efforts.
Federal Partnerships
NIH values collaboration with its federal partners 
and partners extensively with other federal agencies. 
Interagency collaborations address critical public 
health needs and facilitate coordination, communica-
tion, and resource-sharing. For instance, the Tobacco 
Regulatory Science Program (TRSP),
132 a partnership 
between NIH and FDA, funded research on youth 
tobacco use; toxins and nicotine concentration in 
e-cigarettes; and the Population Assessment of 
Tobacco and Health (PATH) Study, a longitudinal 
examination of tobacco product use.
133 Data from 
TRSP studies provide valuable evidence to inform 
government-wide policymaking. Research results 
from the Tobacco Centers of Regulatory Science, a 
centerpiece of TRSP , will provide further insight into 
who is using these products, what health outcomes 
result from product use, and how to implement 
interventions to target health outcomes.
134
Another key federal collaboration is the Interagency 
Pain Research Coordinating Committee (IPRCC),
135 
chaired by NIH with members from several agencies 
within HHS, including FDA, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC), Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality (AHRQ), Department of Defense 
(DoD), and U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 
IPRCC coordinates federal activities to enhance 
pain research efforts and promote collaboration 
across the government, with the ultimate goals of 
advancing the fundamental understanding of pain 
and improving pain-related treatment strategies. NIH 
also partners with DoD and VA on the NIH-DoD-VA 
Pain Management Collaboratory, which supports 
the development, implementation, and testing of 
cost-effective, large-scale, real-world research on 
nonpharmacologic approaches for pain management 
and related conditions in military and veteran health 
care delivery organizations.
136
The 21st Century Cures Act established the HHS 
Task Force on Research Specific to Pregnant Women 
and Lactating Women (PRGLAC) to advise the HHS 
Secretary regarding gaps in knowledge and research 
on safe and effective therapies for pregnant women 
and lactating women (Figure 23).
137 Led by NIH, other 
Figure 22. PubMed Central
As a free archive of full-text biomedical and life sciences journal literature, PubMed Central is an authoritative source 
of scholarly information that ensures the insights gained through biomedical discovery are made openly available to 
research and clinical care communities, as well as to the public at large.
Credit: National Library of Medicine, NIH.

--- PAGE 35 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
25
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
federal members include CDC, FDA, AHRQ, Health 
Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), VA, 
and HHS Office on Women’s Health. Non-federal 
members include representatives from medical soci-
eties, nonprofit organizations, and industry. More than 
6 million women are pregnant in the U.S. each year, 
many taking medications or dietary supplements. 
PRGLAC identified the lack of scientific evidence on 
the safety and efficacy of these compounds during 
pregnancy or breastfeeding as a substantial knowl-
edge gap in maternal health. 
Public-Private Partnerships 
Public–private partnerships (PPPs) provide a mech-
anism to strategically accelerate advances and 
accomplish goals that NIH cannot readily achieve by 
acting alone. For example, to hasten the development 
of interventions for COVID-19, NIH is leading the 
Accelerating COVID-19 Therapeutic Interventions and 
Vaccines (ACTIV)
138 PPP (Figure 24). PPP activities 
focus on the shared goals and mandates of the 
partners and leverage knowledge, skills, resources, 
and services to achieve synergy. For example, NIH—
together with FDA, biopharmaceutical companies, and 
nonprofit organizations—launched the Accelerating 
Medicines Partnership (AMP).
139 The goal of AMP is to 
increase the number of new diagnostics and therapies 
and reduce the time and cost of developing them. 
Four AMP initiatives are underway: AMPAlzheimer’s 
Disease (AMP-AD), AMP-Parkinson’s Disease (AMP-
PD), AMP-Rheumatoid Arthritis/Lupus (AMP-RA/
Lupus), and AMP-type 2 diabetes (AMP-T2D). After 
successfully meeting program milestones, AMP-AD 
and AMP-T2D are finalizing research plans for the next 
phase of the program. New AMP initiatives have been 
launched for schizophrenia
140 and are in development 
for gene therapy.
To capitalize on dramatic advances in genetics, NIH 
and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation have 
expanded their cooperation toward an audacious 
goal: to develop affordable, gene-based cures for 
SCD and HIV within a decade. The intention is for 
these cures to be made globally available, especially 
in lowresource settings where people are most 
affected by these conditions.
Figure 23. Research for Pregnant and 
Lactating Women
The 21st Century Cures Act established the Task Force 
on Research Specific to Pregnant Women and Lactating 
Women (PRGLAC) to advise the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services regarding gaps in knowledge and 
research on safe and effective therapies for pregnant 
women and lactating women. PRGLAC was tasked with 
identifying these gaps and reporting its findings to the 
Secretary. 
Credit: NICHD, NIH.
Figure 24. ACTIV: An Unprecedented Partnership for Unprecedented Times
In April 2020, NIH launched the Accelerating COVID-19 
Therapeutic Interventions and Vaccines (ACTIV) public–
private partnership to develop a coordinated research 
strategy for prioritizing and speeding the clinical evaluation 
of the most promising vaccines for severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS- CoV -2) and treatments for 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19). Through ACTIV, NIH 
has partnered with more than 15 biopharmaceutical com-
panies, as well as its sibling agencies and offices within 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, other 
government agencies, the European Medicines Agency, 
and representatives from academia and philanthropic 
organizations. Through the ACTIV partnership, NIH is 
pursuing four fast

--- PAGE 36 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
26
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
The NIH Science and Technology Research 
Infrastructure for Discovery, Experimentation, and 
Sustainability (STRIDES) Initiative
141—one of many 
NIH-wide efforts underway to implement the NIH 
Strategic Plan for Data Science—provides NIH and 
its funded researchers with cost-effective access 
to state-of-the-art cloud-based data storage and 
computational capabilities, tools, and expertise. 
Through STRIDES, NIH has established PPPs with 
commercial providers, such as Amazon Web Services 
and Google Cloud. NIH anticipates forming additional 
industry partnerships through STRIDES to broaden 
access to services and tools, including training and 
professional services for researchers on how to 
use the latest cloud tools and technologies. These 
partnerships will allow academic researchers and 
industry to come together to create a data ecosystem 
that maximizes the use of NIH-supported biomedical 
and behavioral research data for the greatest benefit 
to human health. 
During the next 5 years, NIH will continue to expand 
partnership opportunities focused on increasing diag-
nostics and therapies for particular conditions, curing 
intractable diseases, and making the vast amount of 
data generated by biomedical research accessible to 
as many researchers as possible.
International Partnerships
As the world grows increasingly connected, NIH 
remains committed to developing and sustaining 
relationships with partners around the globe. Recent 
events, including the COVID-19 pandemic, have 
illuminated the importance of a coordinated approach 
to global health aligned with humanitarian and scien-
tific values. Geographic boundaries do not prevent 
infectious disease spread, nor should they prevent 
the advancement of research on such diseases. For 
this reason, NIH collaborates internationally with 
foreign governments and organizations. 
In collaboration with the Office of the U.S. Global 
AIDS Coordinator and Health Diplomacy, NIH sup-
ports the African Forum for Research and Education 
in Health (AFREhealth)
142,143 Program and the Health-
professional Education Partnership Initiative,144 both 
of which are designed to enhance the quality, quan-
tity, retention, research engagement, and networking 
of an interprofessional health workforce across Africa. 
NIH also supports the Human Heredity and Health 
in Africa Consortium (H3Africa) via the NIH Common 
Fund.
145 This partnership includes the Wellcome Trust 
and the African Academy of Sciences and seeks 
to build African research capacity in the genomic 
sciences and contribute to improving understanding 
of health and disease in underrepresented and 
underserved populations. 
NIH participates in the Global Alliance for Chronic 
Diseases (GACD),
146 a consortium of the world’s 
largest public research funding agencies. GACD’s 
mission is to reduce the burden of chronic 
noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) in low- and 
middle-income countries and in populations facing 
conditions of vulnerability in high-income countries, 
by building evidence to inform national and 
international NCD policies. NIH funds GACD research 
in the areas of cancer prevention, mental health, lung 
disease, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and scaling-
up evidence-based interventions. 
In addition to working with international partners on 
disease, NIH also supports other types of interna-
tional health initiatives. For example, the NIH Disaster 
Research Response (D

--- PAGE 37 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'Vision'] ---
27
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
and NIH grantees of the ECHO Program.148 The 
agreement was created to advance the Navajo Birth 
Cohort Study while respecting Navajo Nation cultural 
beliefs, Tribal sovereignty, and community values.
149 
It is the first Tribal data-sharing agreement for a 
large-scale database as part of a nationwide research 
consortium. This achievement lays the groundwork 
for discussion of similar agreements with other Tribal 
Nations considering participation in biomedical and 
behavioral research programs.
Public engagement is also key to NIH’s maternal 
health efforts. The NIH Task Force on Maternal 
Mortality developed Implementing a Maternal health 
and PRegnancy Outcomes Vision for Everyone 
(IMPROVE), an NIH-wide research initiative. IMPROVE 
was informed by input from a variety of sources, 
including the public and NIH-convened meetings for 
scientists and clinicians to solicit recommendations 
on health disparities underlying maternal mortality, 
as well as gaps and opportunities for future research. 
IMPROVE will focus on women beginning in pregnan-
cy and continuing up to 1 year postpartum and will 
include community-focused social and biobehavioral 
research, as well as research to accelerate discovery 
and advance technologies to reduce maternal health 
risks.
Ensuring Accountability and 
Confidence in Biomedical and 
Behavioral Sciences 
To foster confidence in NIH-funded research and 
results, NIH must ensure that both its operations 
and its supported research are conducted efficiently, 
responsibly, ethically, and with integrity. NIH is 
committed to taking steps to maintain and strengthen 
the processes by which it governs the conduct of 
science, continuing to be accountable for the public 
funds it invests in research.
Enhancing Reproducibility Through 
Rigorous and Transparent Research
Two cornerstones of scientific research are rigor in 
the design and conduct of experiments and the ability 
to reproduce research findings. The application of 
scientific rigor ensures robust and unbiased experi-
mental design, methodology, analysis, interpretation, 
and reporting of results. When a result can be repro-
duced by multiple scientists working independently, it 
validates the original result and indicates readiness to 
progress to the next phase.
NIH has collaborated with scientific journal publishers 
to identify shared opportunities to enhance transpar-
ency, rigor, and reproducibility in published literature. 
NIH has also convened working groups and work-
shops focused on rigor, developed training modules 
for the research community on good experimental 
design, enhanced requirements for the content and 
review of grant applications, and developed specific 
funding opportunities aimed at improving rigor and 
reproducibility. Moving forward, NIH will continue 
working closely with researchers, publishers, and 
federal partners to develop and share recommenda-
tions and best practices. Along these lines, NIH has 
convened a working group of the Advisory Committee 
to the Director to explore ways to enhance reproduc-
ibility and rigor in laboratory animal research.
150
Improving Stewardship of Clinical Trials
NIH invests more than $3 billion each year in clinical 
trials. NIH must ensure these trials investigate 
high-priority questions, do not needlessly duplicate 
previous trials, recruit and maintain sufficient par-
ticipants, are completed in a timely manner, and are 
like

--- PAGE 38 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
28
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
the knowledge gained from research is applicable 
to everyone affected by the disease or condition 
under study (Figure 25). To this end, NIH has taken 
critical steps to ensure the scientifically appropriate 
enrollment of women and underrepresented and 
underserved groups in clinical research and is 
engaged in efforts to increase inclusion of children, 
older adults, pregnant and lactating women, and 
individuals with disabilities as appropriate. NIH 
requires researchers who propose research involving 
human subjects to include plans for how participants 
from these groups will be enrolled, unless there is a 
scientific or ethical justification for their exclusion. 
Once a grant is awarded, researchers must annually 
report deidentified individual-level demographic data 
so that NIH can continue to monitor inclusion. 
NIH will continue its focus on challenges to recruiting 
and retaining underrepresented populations in clinical 
studies and will add data on the age at enrollment of 
participants to the Research, Condition, and Disease 
Classification (RCDC) Inclusion Statistics Report, 
which allows users to view trends over time. In 
addition, NIH will train researchers to include women, 
underrepresented and underserved populations, and 
individuals of all ages in studies as part of its efforts 
to increase the diversity of study populations.
Maintaining Transparency Through Data 
Access and Sharing 
NIH is committed to making findings from the 
research that it funds accessible and available in a 
timely manner, while also providing safeguards for 
privacy, intellectual property, security, and data man-
agement. For instance, NIH-funded investigators are 
expected to make the results and accomplishments 
of their activities freely available within 12 months 
of publication. NIH also encourages investigators to 
share results prior to peer review, such as through 
preprints, to speed the dissemination of their findings 
and enhance the rigor of their work through informal 
peer review.
A robust culture of data sharing is critical to contin-
ued progress in science, maximizing NIH’s investment 
in research, and assurance of the highest levels of 
transparency and rigor. To this end, NIH will continue 
to promote opportunities for data management and 
sharing while allowing flexibility for various data 
types, sharing platforms, and strategies. Additionally, 
NIH is implementing a policy requiring that all appli-
cations include data sharing and management plans 
that consider input from stakeholders.
152,153
Fostering a Safe and Harassment-Free 
Work Environment 
NIH has an imperative to transform the culture of 
science to prevent harassment (sexual, gender, and 
other) and mitigate its detrimental impacts, whether 
it is in the agency or anywhere NIH-funded activities 
are conducted. In 2019, NIH established the Advisory 
Committee to the NIH Director Working Group on 
Changing the Culture to End Sexual Harassment.
154 
Following this group’s recommendations, NIH is 
taking actions within the agency’s authority to change 
the scientific workplace to make it safer and more 
welcoming (Figure 26). NIH issued several new pol-
icies, guidelines, and requirements on this topic and 
communicated them widely to make expectations 
clear to NIH-funded organizations and the workforce 
at NIH.
155 
NIH expects recipients of federal funds to have 
policies and practices in place that fost

--- PAGE 39 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
29
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
fulfill their obligations to conduct research because 
they are under investigation or have been removed 
from the workplace because of sexual harassment 
concerns. NIH expects recipients requesting changes 
in investigator, key personnel, or recipient institution 
to mention whether these requests are related to 
concerns about the safety and/or work environment, 
including issues related to sexual harassment or 
bullying.
157 Internally, NIH has undergone a workplace 
climate and harassment survey to inform policy and 
practice and has expanded its human resources 
program to foster civility throughout the NIH commu-
nity.
158
NIH’s efforts have led to increased scrutiny and 
awareness of harassment, centralized mechanisms 
for reporting harassment, and new anti-harassment 
policies. NIH will continue working with its partners 
and exploring policymaking options based on recom-
mendations from the Advisory Committee to the NIH 
Director and findings from internal studies to change 
the scientific culture, prevent sexual harassment, and 
promote a civil, safe, and respectful workplace for 
everyone.
Managing Risks to the Research Enterprise
NIH is committed to proactively managing risks 
that may impede the NIH mission. Such risks have 
the potential to affect patient and laboratory safety, 
the peer review process, laboratory animal welfare, 
conflict of interest disclosures, closeout of grant 
awards, data security, and more. Understanding the 
need to identify and manage risks, NIH incorporated 
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) capabilities into 
its strategic planning, performance management, and 
resource allocations (see Figure 27). Going forward, 
NIH is better prepared to respond to emerging risks 
that may undermine its research activities and are 
inconsistent with its research values and principles.
Figure 26. NIH Harassment Does Not Work 
Here Campaign
An image stating “Harassment Doesn’t Work Here” 
as part of NIH’s campaign to create a safe and 
civil workplace wherever NIH-funded research is 
conducted.
Credit: NIH Civil Program.
Figure 27. Managing Risks to the Research Enterprise
The NIH Risk Management Program provides NIH with a 
framework for systematically identifying and addressing 
risks that might adversely affect NIH’s ability to fulfill its 
mission. Risk management is a continuous process that 
requires all NIH staff and researchers to proactively identify 
and mitigate risk as part of their daily jobs. Understanding 
the need to identify and manage risk, NIH has incorporated 
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) capabilities into 
its strategic planning, performance management, and 
resource allocations. ERM is a strategic discipline that 
seeks to deliberately and proactively understand the full 
spectrum of risks, including opportunities across an entire 
organization, and integrates them into an enterprise-wide, 
strategically aligned, and interrelated risk portfolio view. By 
incorporating ERM, NIH can proactively address emerging 
threats and opportunities and deliver results to the public in 
a transparent and accountable manner, all in an effort to  
further support NIH’s mission.
Credit: NIH Risk Management Program.

--- PAGE 40 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
30
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
As a part of its commitment to a culture of health and 
safety for people conducting NIH-funded research, 
and to mitigating the effects of emergencies on the 
research enterprise, the NIH Extramural Response 
to Natural Disasters and Other Emergencies policy 
allows NIH to provide resources and assistance to 
those in the NIH community affected by public health 
emergencies.
159 Under such circumstances, NIH 
will provide administrative flexibilities and additional 
funding using a number of mechanisms to support 
the continuation of research, as demonstrated during 
the COVID-19 pandemic.
160
NIH and the research community have a vested 
interest in mitigating any breaches of trust and 
confidentiality that undermine the integrity of U.S. 
biomedical research, while continuing the tradition 
of scientific collaboration, including international 
collaboration. NIH recognizes the importance of these 
collaborations to advancing its mission. However, 
some researchers at NIH-funded institutions have 
taken advantage of these collaborations through fail-
ing to disclose contributions of resources from foreign 
organizations, diverting proprietary information to 
foreign governments, and sharing confidential infor-
mation obtained from NIH peer review meetings or 
otherwise trying to influence the peer review process.
NIH works with other federal agencies to take strong 
actions in response to these breaches of integrity 
which appear to be, at least partly, instigated by 
foreign governments.
161 NIH has increased the 
visibility of this issue and reminds grant recipients to 
be transparent and disclose all affiliations, financial 
conflicts of interest, and other support (including from 
foreign entities) and contacts recipient institutions 
about any concerns.
162 NIH has also bolstered its 
internal processes and systems and increased 
awareness among its own staff. 
Looking to the future, NIH will continue careful 
monitoring and extensive outreach with academia, 
professional societies, and federal partners to 
reinforce the importance of research security and 
integrity, as well as to hold people and institutions 
accountable for inappropriate actions.
163 NIH will 
continue to work closely with federal partners to 
protect the safety, integrity, and inclusivity of U.S. 
research and looks forward to continuing to work with 
institutions and researchers to strengthen values that 
underpin research integrity and protect the nation’s 
biomedical innovations.
164
Reducing Administrative Costs and Work 
Throughout the Grants Process
Reducing administrative burden increases the amount 
of time that investigators can spend on research 
and that administrators can spend supporting the 
research enterprise. NIH works to streamline grants 
policies and processes to reduce administrative 
work and costs. Recent changes include automating 
the issuance of certificates of confidentiality that 
protect participants in NIH-funded research, creating 
the Application Submission System & Interface 
for Submission Tracking (ASSIST) as an option for 
preparing and submitting applications, developing 
a tool that reduces the need to develop clinical trial 
protocol text de novo, simplifying the appendix and 
other material in grant applications to help during the 
review process, and reducing the need for multiple 
biographic profiles across different systems to help 
people find information and sim

--- PAGE 41 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
31
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
by NIH experts in administrative operations with full 
engagement by employees. 
Examples of functional areas that have already seen 
substantial improvement through Optimize NIH 
include management of federal advisory committees, 
employee ethics requirements, and Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) requests. NIH has adopted 
a unified system to standardize and streamline 
management of FOIA requests across the agency and 
has launched a public-facing portal, FOIAXpress, to 
improve the FOIA requestor experience. The launch 
of this portal increased information request process-
ing speed by 83 percent, decreased the backlog by 
11 percent, and offered solutions that can be lever-
aged across HHS. The lessons learned through the 
optimization of initial functional areas will inform NIH’s 
approach to other business practice enhancements, 
such as information technology security, acquisitions, 
appointment of employees via a specialized hiring 
mechanism, travel management, and property 
management. 
Optimize NIH will also continue to establish best 
practices for evaluating employee workload to 
improve the management of resources, inform hiring 
decisions, and reduce workload inequities. Workload 
harmonization across ICs and OD offices is already 
underway for scientific review, grants management, 
and program management, with additional areas 
identified for future improvement. NIH will also 
continue to harmonize and align each IC’s strategic 
plan with a common template derived from the NIH-
Wide Strategic Plan. Taken together, Optimize NIH 
projects will improve organizational effectiveness and 
performance and maximize the investment made by 
American taxpayers.
In alignment with the Reimagine HHS and Optimize 
NIH initiatives and in response to NIH community 
feedback, the NIH OD launched the OD Strategic 
Engagement Agenda to foster a unified and 
coordinated OD, which engages seamlessly with 
the ICs to advance the mission of the agency. This 
data- and participant-driven initiative will solicit and 
incorporate employee input through listening tours, 
working groups, and an online ideation campaign 
to improve communication and functionality within 
the OD through coordination and engagement 
with the ICs. By working toward these goals and 
improving on the use of OD operating principles of 
transparency, accountability, strategy, coordination, 
and decisionmaking, NIH will increase the efficiency 
and effectiveness of collaboration across NIH. 
Meeting the goal of increased efficiency and effec-
tiveness of operations across the agency requires 
the systematic assessment and management of 
risk in NIH’s administrative and scientific programs, 
processes, and procedures. NIH is committed 
to integrating an ERM framework into its organi-
zational culture to help prevent surprises, avoid 
operational failures, and allow quicker recovery 
when the unexpected happens. For example, NIH 
evaluated the extramural grant program using a 
fraud risk framework to identify vulnerabilities and 
develop mitigation strategies, including a staff fraud 
awareness and training program, to reduce the risk 
Figure 28. NIH Campuses
Aerial views and photos of various building on NIH 
campuses showing a portfolio of biomedical research, 
administrative, and infrastructure-supporting facili-
ties. From left to right and top to bottom: Research 
Triangle Park, North Carolina; Phoenix Epidemiology 


--- PAGE 42 matched=['Crosscutting Theme', 'Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
32
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Many scientific challenges and opportunities are 
not unique to any one Objective in this Strategic 
Plan. To emphasize this, NIH has identified five key 
Crosscutting Themes that span all aspects of NIH’s 
Strategy.
Improving Minority 
Health and Reducing 
Health Disparities
Underserved groups—including 
Black, Latinx, and Indigenous and 
Native American persons, Asian 
Americans and Pacific Islanders, 
and other persons of color; members of religious 
minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and 
queer (LGBTQ+) persons; persons with disabilities; 
persons who live in rural areas; or persons otherwise 
adversely affected by persistent poverty or inequali-
ty—have distinct health needs and often experience 
disparities in health outcomes. NIH maintains that 
racial and ethnic minorities, rural residents, people 
with low incomes, SGM, and other populations 
experiencing health disparities should be included 
in all relevant research, such that there is sufficient 
representation of each population to conduct relevant 
analyses. Inclusivity in research generates more 
broadly applicable information and improves scientific 
understanding of the health and well-being of specific 
population groups.
To promote health equity, NIH remains committed to 
supporting a robust program of research examining 
how biological, behavioral, environmental, socio-
 
cultural, and other factors interact with and shape 
individuals’ health trajectories across the lifespan. 
The science of minority health and health disparities 
is founded on the principle that the social construct 
of individual race and ethnicity and socioeconomic 
status influence behavior, biology
, and health 
outcomes in many defined and undefined ways. 
These individual factors interact with structural social 
determinants that may promote cumulative adversity 
that leads to worsened health outcomes through 
biological mechanisms. 
Racism and discrimination are increasingly recog-
nized as contributing to poorer health outcomes for 
of fraud in the NIH extramural program and protect 
public funds. By conducting risk assessments and 
leveraging data collected within the ERM framework, 
NIH will improve information sharing and leadership 
decisionmaking and will prioritize corrective actions 
for identified risks. Incorporating ERM practices into 
daily operations also supports NIH in taking risks 
intelligently and prudently to achieve desired mission 
outcomes and enhances the agency’s transparency 
and accountability to the public.
Underpinning NIH efforts to optimize its administra-
tive and scientific operations are efforts to advance 
the agency’s physical and technological infrastruc-
tures. For example, many of the agency’s research 
and supporting facilities were constructed more than 
50 years ago and require significant operating and 
maintenance costs, repairs, and upgrades to remain 
competitive in a global research environment. As 
resources become available, NIH will make strategic 
investments in building, expanding, and modernizing 
infrastructure on all its campuses. 
It is critical that NIH provide, maintain, and operate 
its physical infrastructure—buildings and facilities 
capable of fulfilling and responding to the complex, 
collaborative, and changing nature of biomedical and 
behavioral science (Figure 28). The conduct of sci-
entific discovery is enabled through safe and reliable 
facilities that can 

--- PAGE 43 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
33
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Public Health 
Challenges Across 
the Lifespan
Collaborative 
Science
Minority Health 
and Health 
Disparities
Women’s Health Data Science
racial and ethnic minorities and other disproportion-
ately affected populations. There is also a growing 
societal recognition that racism and discrimination 
extend beyond the behavior of individuals and are 
embedded in social, institutional, organizational, and 
governmental structures, processes, procedures, 
and practices that limit opportunities and resources 
to segments of the population.
167 NIH understands 
that health research needs to routinely incorporate 
constructs and measurement of structural racism or 
discrimination across multiple domains and levels of 
influence if minority health is to be optimized, health 
equity achieved, and health disparities eliminated.
168
Understanding why underrepresented groups 
experience specific health outcomes is at the core 
of minority health science. It is essential to identify 
contributing factors to minority health conditions 
independent of whether a health disparity exists or 
is identified. Minority health research is the scientific 
investigation of distinctive health characteristics and 
attributes of minority racial and/or ethnic groups that 
are usually underrepresented in biomedical research 
to understand health outcomes in these populations 
and develop interventions to reduce disparities in 
health outcomes. The NIH Minority Health and Health 
Disparities Strategic Plan
169 sets the direction and 
goals for NIH research in this area. Several NIH ICs 
and OD offices have core missions to address the 
health of underserved and underrepresented popu-
lations and to ensure they are adequately included in 
all NIH research. In addition, NIH-wide strategic plans 
identify efforts specific to the needs of underrepre-
sented populations to develop synergy and facilitate 
collaborations across NIH.
170,171,172 
Promoting the recruitment, retention, and advance-
ment of scientists from underserved groups will also 
have a significant influence on workforce develop-
ment and will provide opportunities for individual 
scientists to achieve their full potential, thereby 
improving research on minority health and reducing 
health disparities.
Enhancing Women’s 
Health
Women’s health is a wide- 
ranging topic that goes beyond 
reproductive health to addr
ess 
a broader spectrum of diseases 
and conditions experienced by 
women throughout their lifespan. To advance science 
for the health of women, the Trans-NIH Strategic 
Plan for Women’s Health Research
173 established 
NIH priorities across the research continuum and 
emphasized the importance of interdisciplinary 
partnerships. The NIH policy on Sex as a Biological 
Variable,
174 along with the expanded NIH Inclusion 
Policy175 that requires investigators to report Phase 
III clinical trial results by sex or gender, race, and 
ethnicity to ClinicalTrials.gov,
176 will build foundational 
knowledge, accelerate translational research, and 
ultimately enable women to receive evidence-based 
interventions specific to their needs. 
Promoting the recruitment, retention, and advance-
ment of women scientists will also have a significant 
influence on workforce development, as well as 
provide opportunities for individual scientists to 
achieve their full potential, thereby improving research 
on the health of women.
Addressing Public 
Health Chall

--- PAGE 44 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
34
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
postpartum, but also cumulative and intergenerational 
impacts and exposures. 
In addition to these programmatic approaches, NIH 
policies set the expectation that all supported studies 
will be designed to include children and older adults 
unless there is a scientific or ethical reason to exclude 
them. This policy ensures that the scientific findings 
for a given disease or condition are applicable to all 
those affected.
178
Promoting Collaborative 
Science 
Complex public health challenges 
and scientific questions require 
collaborative, team-driven research 
involving experts working together 
across multiple scientific fields, 
resulting in innovations that exceed the capacity 
of a single laboratory or discipline. NIH promotes 
opportunities that bring together scientists and 
clinicians and recognizes patients and research 
participants as partners and collaborators to generate 
outcomes that address the public health challenges 
that communities face. NIH partners with a wide 
array of other federal agencies, and domestic and 
international organizations in the public and private 
sectors to leverage their respective expertise and 
translate NIH research findings into new therapies, 
technologies, and evidence-based practices for 
improving health. For example, efforts to accelerate 
COVID-19 diagnostics, therapeutic interventions, and 
vaccine development are being conducted alongside 
sister agencies within HHS and representatives from 
academic, nonprofit, and commercial organizations.
179
Scientific progress also benefits from collaboration 
across NIH ICs and OD offices. These NIH collabora-
tions occur at every level of NIH operation, resulting 
in innovative scientific programs that address a wide 
range of health conditions. For example, the Pediatric 
Research Consortium brings together staff from 
across NIH to discuss issues in pediatric research 
for a range of health conditions. NIH also cultivates 
strategic partnerships across HHS to strengthen the 
public health ecosystem. For example, NIH plays a 
key role in the Department-wide implementation and 
dissemination of the HHS Secretary’s evidence-based 
initiative to combat opioid use disorder. 
Leveraging Data 
Science for Biomedical 
Discovery
An immense amount of data is 
generated throughout the research 
enterprise, from fundamental 
experiments using cells and model 
organisms to human clinical studies and communi-
ty-level epidemiological research. The exponential 
growth of data has resulted from the development 
of advanced biomedical technologies and computa-
tional processing unavailable a decade ago, including 
advanced AI and virtual reality technologies. These 
transformative changes require innovative approach-
es and business practices to address opportunities 
and challenges in data science. Storing, managing, 
standardizing, analyzing, sharing, and disseminating 
vast amounts of data are therefore critical priorities 
for NIH. 
The NIH Strategic Plan for Data Science
180 provides 
a roadmap for modernizing and integrating the 
NIHfunded biomedical data ecosystem, which com-
prises the universe of data infrastructure, resources, 
tools, and workforce. Combining existing strengths 
with new strategic partnerships, NIH works to ensure 
that data resources are guided by the FAIR principles 
(Figure 21).
181,182 Implementing the NIH Strategic Plan 
for Data Science will enhance the scientific com

--- PAGE 45 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
35
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Bold Predictions
In the previous iteration of the NIH-Wide Strategic 
Plan, NIH set out 14 ambitious goals, or “Bold 
Predictions,” for the next 5 years. These short-term 
predictions were considered aspirational goals 
for biomedical and behavioral research that were 
potentially within reach, but by no means guaran-
teed outcomes. The 14 Bold Predictions were not 
an exhaustive list of all of the potential avenues of 
success for NIH but were designed to illustrate some 
of the potential achievements in a wide range of 
research fields that might be possible under NIH’s 
stewardship. NIH has made significant progress on 
all 14 Bold Predictions, with four being fully realized 
within the ambitious 5-year timeframe. Despite the 
risks associated with making short-term predictions, 
it is important that NIH continue to place high hopes 
on the ability for NIH-supported research to push 
the boundaries of innovation faster than ever before. 
Below are some of the outcomes that NIH will strive 
to deliver over the next 5 years.
1. The All of Us Research Program will reach its goal of 1 million diverse participants and will have gathered the 
most diverse collection of data (e.g., 
deep phenotypic, -omic, EHR, digital health technology) on 1 million or more 
participants of any research resource in the world.
2. The regular use of genomic information will have transitioned from boutique to mainstream in all clinical settings, 
making genomic testing as routine as complete blood counts.
3. Human studies on type 1 diabetes will assess the long-term survival and function of encapsulated human islets, 
as well as their efficacy in preventing or delaying the onset of complications and increasing overall survival.
4. Incorporating novel genomics findings from clinical studies on congenital heart disease will help researchers 
move toward precision therapy and personalized counseling, leading to improved outcomes and longevity for 
affected childr
en and adults.
5. The high burden of heart disease in communities of color and rural areas will be reduced, especially for major 
outcomes, such as maternal morbidity and mortality, hypertension, and heart failure. 
6. A gene therapy for muscular dystrophy will restore the function of the mutated gene and improve patient 
outcomes.
7. Gene-based therapies for SCD will be evaluated and refined in large-scale clinical trials, offering a cure to the 
approximately 100,000 people in the U.S. and 20 million globally who suffer severe pain and premature death 
from this condition.
8. First-in-human clinical trials will demonstrate the ef
ficacy of iPSC-derived products.
9. Engineered biological cells and scaffolds will be successfully used to repair and replace tissue damaged by 
chronic wounds or such disorders as osteoarthritis.
10. Insight will be gained into the ultimate ability to regenerate human limbs, using emerging technologies to activate 
the body’s own growth pathways and processes.
11. Research on new approaches to cervical cancer screening will lead to the development of self-sampling for 
women, with the potential to substantially reduce the incidence and mortality of this disease.
12. At least one novel, non-hormonal pharmacologic treatment for endometriosis will be identified and moved to 
clinical trials.
13. The number of maternal deaths per year in the U.S. will be significantly decreased, particularly among Black and 
American Indian o

--- PAGE 46 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
36
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
16. At least one candidate universal influenza vaccine against groups 1 and 2 with 75 percent efficacy will be 
submitted to the FDA for consideration.
17. NIH-supported resear
chers will develop a universal coronavirus vaccine.
18. By actively engaging with underserved populations to reduce disparities for COVID-19, r
esearchers will prevent 
and curb the spr
ead of COVID-19 and save lives. 
19. AI will reveal molecular signatures associated with the return to health after an acute illness (e.g., COVID-19).
20. Biomarkers will guide the choice of the most ef
fective therapy for each individual rheumatoid arthritis patient.
21. NIH-supported research will lead to the development of a clinically actionable biomarker for precision psychiatry, 
using neur
oimaging and/or additional physiological and psychological biomarkers.
22. Comprehensive atlases of cell types in the mouse and human brain will provide a deeper understanding of the 
circuits underlying behavior and a foundation for understanding the circuits affected in complex human brain 
disorders, including depression.
23. Invasive and noninvasive human brain r
ecording and stimulation technologies will enable new paradigms for 
interventions in movement disorders and neuropsychiatric diseases, as well as the development of brain- 
machine interfaces for sensory and motor neural prostheses.
24. Preventive appr
oaches targeting vascular risk factors will reduce the risk for dementia and promote healthy brain 
aging.
25. At least one promising lifestyle intervention to prevent Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias will be rigor-
ously demonstrated in the next 5 years.
26. The r
ole of cellular senescence in aging and disease will be clarified and translated into interventions to improve 
health.
27. Infant survival will be optimized by synthesizing milk that captures all of the components and properties of 
human milk, even individualizing it to the characteristics of the infant’s mother.
28. NIH research will discover how technology exposure and media use affect developmental trajectories, health and 
educational outcomes, and parent–child interactions in childhood in the post-COVID-19 era. 
29. NIH research will lead to optimized treatment for infants with Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome.
30. NIH research will identify one promising intervention to mitigate risks of altered brain development trajectories 
produced by exposure to alcohol and other drugs among adolescents.
31. Increasing evidence of the effectiveness of nonpharmacologic treatments for pain will transform the way pain is 
managed and decrease the need for opioids and other medications.
32. Effective screening based on a person’s genetics, environmental exposures, and sociobehavioral factors will 
significantly decrease the 9 million lives lost each year to global air pollution by identifying those who are most 
vulnerable for early intervention. 
33. NIH and NASA will spearhead the development of a space-based platform that will monitor species diversity and 
predict geographic areas of climate concern. 
34. The number of NIH R01 awards that support principal investigators from underrepresented racial and ethnic 
gr
oups will be increased by 50 percent, and the racial funding disparities gap for NIH R01 grants will be eliminat-
ed by fiscal year 2025.
35. New forms of scientific communications, such as preprints, will accelerate clinical research and shorten

--- PAGE 47 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
37
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
1 https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/mission-goals. 
2 https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/who-we-are/organization. 
3 https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/budget.  
4 https://report.nih.gov/nihdatabook/category/10. 
5 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/peer-review.htm.
6 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/peerreview22713webv2.pdf. 
7 https://grants.nih.gov/funding/index.htm. 
8 https://irp.nih.gov/about-us/what-is-the-irp. 
9 https://irp.nih.gov/nih-clinical-center.  
10 https://clinicalcenter.nih.gov/ocmr/research-discoveries.html. 
11 Collins FS. NIH Basics. Science, 2012; 337:503. PMID: 22859455.  
12 Moses H 3rd, et al. JAMA, 2015; 313(2):174-89. PMID: 25585329.
13 https://www.genome.gov/Funded-Programs-Projects/ENCODE-Project-ENCyclopedia-Of-DNA-Elements.
14 https://www.genome.gov/Funded-Programs-Projects/ClinGen-Clinical-Genome-Resource. 
15 https://www.genome.gov/Funded-Programs-Projects/Human-Genome-Reference-Program#faq. 
16 https://commonfund.nih.gov/hmp. 
17 Elovitz MA, et al. Nature Communications 2019;10(1):1305. PMID 30899005. 
18 Gehrig JL, et al. Science 2019;365(6449):eaau4732. PMID: 31296738.
19 Wilbert SA, et al. Cell Rep. 2020;30:4003-15.e3. PMID: 32209464. 
20 https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/budget/plan/immune-system-and-cancer.
21 Hand TW. et al. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2016;27(12):831-43. PMID: 27623245.  
22 https://abcdstudy.org/about/.
23 Paulus MP , et al. Neuroimage 2019;185:140-53. PMID: 30339913.  
24 Fine JD et al. JAMA Psychiatry 2019;76(7):762-4. PMID: 30916716. 
25 Cheng W, et al. Mol Psychiatry, 2020. PMID: 32015467
26 https://braininitiative.nih.gov.
27 https://braininitiative.nih.gov/brain-programs/cell-census-network-biccn.   
28 https://commonfund.nih.gov/singlecell. 
29 https://commonfund.nih.gov/hubmap. 
30 https://acd.od.nih.gov/documents/presentations/12132019AI.pdf. 
31 Peng Y , et al. Ophthalmology 2019;126(4):565-75. PMID: 30471319.  
32 Keenan TD, et al. Ophthalmology 2019;126(11):1533-40. PMID: 31358385. 
33 https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-permits-marketing-artificial-intelligence-based-de-
vice-detect-certain-diabetes-related-eye. 
34 https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/social-determinants-of-health. 
35 Walsh JJ, et al. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2018;2(11):783-91. PMID: 30268792.  
36 Trinh MH, et al. JAMA Pediatr 2019;174(1):71-8. PMID: 31764966. 
37 https://www.niaid.nih.gov/diseases-conditions/infographic-hiv-vaccine.
38 https://www.niaid.nih.gov/diseases-conditions/coronaviruses-therapeutics-vaccines. 
39 https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/statement-nih-barda-fda-emergency-use-authorization-moder-
na-covid-19-vaccine.
40
 Regules JA, et al. N Engl J Med 2017;376(4):330-41. PMID: 25830322. 
41 https://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/ebola/ebola-ring-vaccination-results-12-april-2019.pdf?ua=1.
42 https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden/index.html. 
43 https://www.niaid.nih.gov/diseases-conditions/universal-influenza-vaccine-research. 
44 https://www.niaid.nih.gov/news-events/nih-begins-first-human-trial-universal-influenza-vaccine-candidate. 
45 https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr69/nvsr69-13-508.pdf.
46 https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/suicide/rates_1999_2017.pdf.
47 Boudreaux ED, et al. Contemp. Clin. Trials 2013;36(1):14-24. PMID: 23707435. 
48 https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/science/framingham-heart-study-fhs. 
49 https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/science/systolic-blood-press

--- PAGE 48 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
38
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
54 https://allofus.nih.gov.
55 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-17-483.html. 
56 https://orwh.od.nih.gov/sex-gender.
57 https://www.nih.gov/news-events/nih-research-matters/replacing-function-impaired-cystic-fibrosis-protein. 
58 https://commonfund.nih.gov/hcscollaboratory. 
59 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29860917/. 
60 https://www.cancer.gov/news-events/press-releases/2018/tailorx-breast-cancer-chemotherapy.  
61 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29385370/. 
62 https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-approves-first-automated-insulin-delivery-de-
vice-type-1-diabetes. 
63 https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-authorizes-first-interoperable-automated-insulin-dos-
ing-controller-designed-allow-more-choices.  
64
 Bekiari E, et al. BMJ 2018; 361:k1310. PMID: 29669716. 
65 http://www.braininitiative.nih.gov.
66 https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/resources-for-health-educators/eye-health-data-and-statistics/age-re-
lated-macular-degeneration-amd-data-and-statistics. 
67
 Sharma R, et al. Sci Transl Med 2019;11(475):eaat5580. PMID: 30651323.
68 https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-launches-first-us-clinical-trial-patient-derived-stem-cell-therapy-
replace-dying-cells-retina.
69
 https://ncats.nih.gov/tissuechip/about/operations. 
70 https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-funded-tissue-chips-rocket-international-space-station. 
71 https://www.niaid.nih.gov/clinical-trials/laboratory-infectious-diseases. 
72 Mulangu S, et al. N Engl J Med 2019;381(24):2293-303. PMID: 31774950. 
73 Dahlhamer J, et al. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2018;67(36):1001-6. PMID: 30212442.
74 https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db394.htm.
75 https://heal.nih.gov/. 
76 https://www.niaid.nih.gov/clinical-trials/pact. 
77 https://fnih.org/what-we-do/programs/partnership-for-accelerating-cancer-therapies. 
78 Kennedy LB, Salama AKS. CA Cancer J Clin 2020;70(2):86-104. PMID: 31944278.
79 https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/sicklecell/data.html.  
80 https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-researchers-create-new-viral-vector-improved-gene-therapy-
sickle-cell-disease.
81
 https://scdic.rti.org/.
82 https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/science/cure-sickle-cell-initiative.
83 https://grants.nih.gov/ngri.htm.
84 https://www.nlm.nih.gov/ep/GrantTrainInstitute.html.   
85 https://orwh.od.nih.gov/career-development-education/building-interdisciplinary-research-careers-wom-
ens-health-bircwh.
86
 https://www.nigms.nih.gov/training/careerdev/Pages/MOSAIC.aspx.
87 https://commonfund.nih.gov/diversity. 
88 https://acd.od.nih.gov/documents/presentations/06132019Diversity.pdf. 
89 https://dpcpsi.nih.gov/sites/default/files/CoC_Jan_2020_1115_FIRST_program_concept_clearance.pdf. 
90 https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/01/nih-s-new-cluster-hiring-program-aims-help-schools-attract-diverse-fac-
ulty.
91
 https://diversity.nih.gov/programs-partnerships/dsp.
92 https://womeninscience.nih.gov/. 
93 https://www.fic.nih.gov/Programs/Pages/infectious-disease.aspx. 
94 https://commonfund.nih.gov/CryoEM.  
95 https://heal.nih.gov/about/public-access-data. 
96 https://dash.nichd.nih.gov/. 
97 https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-compare/. 
98 https://seer.cancer.gov/. 
99 https://www.nimhd.nih.gov/programs/extramural/research-centers/rcmi/index.html.  
100 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-MD-20-006.html. 
101 https://ncats.nih.gov/ctsa. 
102 https://g

--- PAGE 49 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
39
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
109 https://www.ninr.nih.gov/newsandinformation/pressreleases/press-release-symptom-science-center. 
110 https://www.hhs.gov/about/strategic-plan/index.html.  
111 https://report.nih.gov/reports/strategic-plans.  
112 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/peer-review.htm. 
113 https://public.csr.nih.gov/StudySections/CSREnquire. 
114 https://public.csr.nih.gov/ForReviewers/BecomeAReviewer/ECR. 
115 https://projectreporter.nih.gov/.  
116 https://report.nih.gov/nihdatabook/.  
117 https://report.nih.gov/.  
118 https://icite.od.nih.gov/.  
119 https://federalreporter.nih.gov/.  
120 https://gcn.com/articles/2018/12/03/nsf-blockchain.aspx.  
121 https://smrb.od.nih.gov/documents/reports/VOBR SMRB__Report_2014.pdf.  
122 https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/4174. 
123 https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases. 
124 https://directorsblog.nih.gov/.  
125 https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/impact-nih-research/our-stories.   
126 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.  
127 https://www.nlm.nih.gov/news/NLMAnnouncesNewPubMed_202002.html. 
128 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/.  
129 https://www.semanticscholar.org/cord19.  
130 https://icite.od.nih.gov/covid19/search/.  
131 https://registry.opendata.aws/ncbi-covid-19/.  
132 https://prevention.nih.gov/tobacco-regulatory-research. 
133 https://pathstudyinfo.nih.gov/landing. 
134 https://prevention.nih.gov/tobacco-regulatory-research/funded-research/funded-research-tobacco-centers-regulato-
ry-science.
135 https://www.iprcc.nih.gov/.
136 http://painmanagementcollaboratory.org/. 
137 https://www.nichd.nih.gov/about/advisory/PRGLAC. 
138 https://www.nih.gov/research-training/medical-research-initiatives/activ.  
139 https://www.nih.gov/research-training/accelerating-medicines-partnership-amp. 
140 https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-public-private-partnership-advance-early-interventions-schizo-
phrenia.
141
 https://cloud.nih.gov/.
142 https://www.afrehealth.org/. 
143 https://www.fic.nih.gov/Programs/Pages/african-association-health-professions.aspx. 
144 https://www.fic.nih.gov/Programs/Pages/health-professional-education-partnership-initiative-hepi.aspx.  
145 https://h3africa.org/.  
146 https://www.fic.nih.gov/Funding/Pages/collaborations-gacd.aspx.  
147 https://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/programs/disaster/index.cfm. 
148 https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-facilitates-first-tribal-data-sharing-agreement-navajo-nation. 
149 https://echochildren.org/nih-echo-and-the-navajo-nation-make-history-with-new-data-sharing-and-use-agreement/.
150 https://www.acd.od.nih.gov/working-groups/eprar.html. 
151 https://grants.nih.gov/policy/clinical-trials.htm.
152 https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/who-we-are/nih-director/statements/statement-final-nih-policy-data-manage-
ment-sharing.
153
 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-21-013.html.
154 https://www.acd.od.nih.gov/working-groups/sexual-harassment.html. 
155 https://www.nih.gov/anti-sexual-harassment. 
156 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/harassment.htm#:~:text=Anti-Sexual. 
157 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-20-124.html. 
158 https://diversity.nih.gov/building-evidence/harassment-survey. 
159 https://grants.nih.gov/policy/natural-disasters.htm. 
160 https://grants.nih.gov/policy/natural-disasters/corona-virus.htm. 
161 https://grants.nih.gov/policy/protecting-innovation.htm. 
162 https://nexus.od.nih.gov/all/2019

--- PAGE 50 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
40
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
165 https://nexus.od.nih.gov/all/2019/08/05/linking-orcid-identifiers-to-era-profiles-to-streamline-application-process-
es-and-to-enhance-tracking-of-career-outcomes/.
166 https://www.nap.edu/read/25483/. 
167 https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/social-determinants-health/interventions-resources/dis-
crimination.
168
 https://www.nimhd.nih.gov/about/overview/research-framework.html.
169 https://www.nimhd.nih.gov/about/overview/strategic-plan.html. 
170 https://www.nimhd.nih.gov/about/overview/strategic-plan.html. 
171 https://dpcpsi.nih.gov/file/sgm-strategic-plan-2021-2025. 
172 https://orwh.od.nih.gov/sites/orwh/files/docs/ORWH_Strategic_Plan_2019_02_21_19_V2_508C.pdf. 
173 https://orwh.od.nih.gov/about/trans-nih-strategic-plan-womens-health-research. 
174 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-15-102.html. 
175 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-18-014.html. 
176 https://clinicaltrials.gov/. 
177 https://report.nih.gov/categorical_spending.aspx. 
178 https://grants.nih.gov/policy/inclusion/lifespan.htm. 
179 https://covid19.nih.gov/nih-strategic-response-covid-19. 
180 https://datascience.nih.gov/strategicplan.   
181 https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/. 
182 Wilkinson MD, et al. Sci. Data 2016;3:19. PMID: 26978244. 

--- PAGE 52 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission', 'division of '] ---
42
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Appendix I: NIH Statutory Authority
Begun as a one-room Laboratory of Hygiene in 1887 
(renamed the Hygienic Library in 1891), the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH) today is one of the world’s 
foremost medical research centers. An agency of 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
NIH is the federal focal point for health research. The 
Statutory Authority granted to NIH generally appears 
in Title IV of the Public Health Service (PHS) Act, 
 
42 U.S.C. 281 et seq. This authority has a long 
history with many revisions and additions granted 
by new legislation over the years. Below are several 
highlights fr
om the legislative history of NIH.
The Ransdell Act, P .L. 71–251
On May 26, 1930, the Ransdell Act reorganized, 
expanded, and redesignated the Hygienic Laboratory 
of the Public Health Service as the National Institute 
of Health (NIH), authorizing $750,000 for construction 
of two buildings for NIH and creating a system of 
fellowships.
The Public Health Service Act,  
P .L. 78–410
On July 1, 1944, the PHS Act (P .L. 78—410) consol-
idated and revised existing public health legislation, 
dividing the PHS into the Office of the Surgeon 
General, the Bureau of Medical Services, the Bureau 
of State Services, and NIH. The PHS Act gave NIH 
the legislative basis for its postwar program, with 
general authority to conduct and support research 
into the diseases and impairments of man, authorized 
research projects and fellowships, and made the 
National Cancer Institute a division of NIH.
The National Heart Act of 1948,  
P .L. 80–655
On June 16, 1948, the National Heart Act of 1948 
amended the PHS Act and authorized the National 
Heart Institute and changed the name of the National 
Institute of Health to National Institutes of Health.
The Public Health Improvement 
Act, P .L. 106–505
On November 13, 2000, the Public Health Improve-
ment Act amended the PHS Act and provided new 
authorities to NIH and other PHS agencies and 
placed ongoing activities or programs in statute. 
The National Institutes of Health 
Reform Act of 2006, P .L. 109–482
On January 15, 2007, the NIH Reform Act of 2006 
affirmed the importance of NIH and its vital role in 
advancing biomedical research to improve the 
 
health of the nation. The law reinforced how NIH’
s  
27 Institutes and Centers, along with various other 
NIH components, work together on the nation’s 
largest medical r
esearch enterprise. Among its provi-
sions, the NIH Reform Act revised Title IV of the PHS 
Act to create the Division of Program Coordination, 
Planning, and Strategic Initiatives, to be supported by 
a Common Fund.
The 21st Century Cures Act,  
P .L. 114–255
On December 13, 2016, the 21st Century Cures Act 
provided NIH with critical tools and resources to 
advance biomedical research across the spectrum, 
from foundational basic research studies to advanced 
clinical trials of promising new therapies. The Cures 
Act provided NIH with important new authorities that 
could be employed to hasten its mission to improve 
the health of Americans.

--- PAGE 53 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
43
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Appendix II: NIH Organizational Chart
National Eye Institute National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute
National Institutes of Health
Ofﬁce of the Director
National Human
Genome Research
Institute
National Cancer
Institute
National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism
National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious
Diseases
National Institute of 
Arthritis and
Musculoskeltal and
Skin Diseases
National Institute on
Aging
Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of
Child Health and 
Human Development
National Institute on
Deafness and Other
Communication
Disorders
National Institute of 
Dental and Craniofacial
Research
National Institute of
Biomedical Imaging
and Bioengineering
National Institute on
Drug Abuse
National Institute of
Environmental Health
Sciences
National Institute of 
General Medical
Sciences
National Institute of
Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney
Diseases
National Institute on
Minority Health and
Health Disparities
National Institute of
Neurological
Disorders and Stroke
National Institute of 
Nursing Research
National Institute of
Mental Health
John E. Fogarty
International Center 
for Advanced Study in
the Health Sciences
National Center for
Advancing
Translational Sciences
National Center for
Complementary and
Integrative Health
National Library of
Medicine
Center for
Information
Technology
Center for Scientiﬁc
Review
Clinical Center

--- PAGE 54 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission', 'Division of '] ---
44
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Appendix III: Strategic Planning Process
The National Institutes of Health (NIH)-Wide Strategic 
Plan outlines NIH’s research priorities and how these 
priorities align with the agency’s mission and goals 
in an evolving research landscape. It represents one 
facet of NIH’s stewardship of federal dollars and 
contributes to maintaining transparency and account-
ability to its many stakeholders.
Biomedical and behavioral science is progressing 
rapidly. To keep pace and capitalize on scientific 
advances while addressing evolving public health 
needs, NIH updates the NIH-Wide Strategic Plan 
every 5 years. The NIH-Wide Strategic Plan is a 
living document, with each iteration building off the 
foundation of the previous plan and aligning with 
the agency’s near-, mid-, and long-range goals. 
This latest iteration of the NIH-Wide Strategic Plan, 
covering fiscal years 2021–2025, retains many of 
the core elements of the NIH-Wide Strategic Plan 
for fiscal years 2016–2020. However, the Strategic 
Plan has been revised, updated, and expanded in 
response to the many discoveries and changes in 
the field made during the past 5 years. As part of this 
process, the Framework around which the Strategic 
Plan is organized has also been revised.
In September 2019, NIH began updating the NIH-
Wide Strategic Plan to cover fiscal years 2021–2025. 
The goal was to follow a process that was transpar-
ent, focused on science and good stewardship of 
research, guided by evidence, and informed by NIH’s 
many stakeholders. 
The strategic planning process entailed four phases: 
(1) pre-planning, (2) gathering internal input and 
development of the Strategic Plan framework, 
 
(3) gathering input from external stakeholders, and 
(4) drafting and publishing the Strategic Plan. The 
following ar
e key activities undertaken during these 
four phases.
Pre-Planning
The NIH Division of Program Coordination, Planning, 
and Strategic Initiatives (DPCPSI) within the Office of 
the Director (OD), coordinated the development of the 
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for fiscal years 2021–2025. 
At the initiation of this process, DPCPSI developed 
a timeline for the strategic planning process and 
established an internal NIH-Wide Strategic Plan 
Working Group, composed of staff from each Institute 
and Center (IC) and OD Office, representing the 
range of NIH’s activities and research portfolio. The 
first Working Group meeting was held at the end of 
September 2019. 
Gathering Internal Input and 
Development of the Strategic Plan 
Framework
From October to December 2019, the Working Group 
met biweekly to develop the Framework for the 
Strategic Plan, which outlines, at a high level, NIH’s 
priorities for biomedical and behavioral research 
that will be addressed over the next five years. The 
Framework of the NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for fiscal 
years 2016-2020 was used as a starting point, and 
the Framework for the new Strategic Plan evolved 
over several meetings. The proposed framework was 
reviewed by the IC Directors at the end of October, 
the Advisory Committee to the NIH Director in 
December, and the DPCPSI Council of Councils in 
January 2020. The final Framework was approved by 
NIH Leadership.
In parallel with development of the Framework, ICs 
and OD Offices were asked to provide information on 
biomedical and behavioral research advances that 
have been made under the NIH-Wide Strategic Plan 
for fiscal years 

--- PAGE 55 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
45
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
the general public—provides valuable insight to be 
considered during its strategic planning process.
To solicit comments on the proposed Framework 
from external stakeholders, the Working Group 
developed a Request for Information (RFI) in the NIH 
Guide (NOT-OD-20-064
1) and the Federal Register 
(FRN 2020-029192), which was advertised broadly. 
Comments were accepted online from February 12, 
2020, to April 1, 2020. NIH received 160 responses 
to the RFI from external stakeholders. In addition, 
NIH hosted two webinars on March 9 and 16, 2020, 
to provide the opportunity for stakeholders to ask 
questions on the Strategic Plan development process 
and comment on the Framework. A summary of RFI 
responses, the webinar slides, and transcript, will 
be made available on the NIH-Wide Strategic plan 
webpage.
3
Drafting and Publishing the 
Strategic Plan
In January 2020, the Working Group began drafting 
the Strategic Plan based on the Framework and the 
prioritized content approved by NIH Leadership. As 
it became available from the RFI and webinars, the 
Working Group reviewed public feedback on the 
Framework and adjusted the draft Strategic Plan in 
response to this input. 
Finalizing and Publishing the 
Strategic Plan
The draft Strategic Plan was finalized through an iter-
ative review process with NIH Leadership. Beginning 
in July 2020, the draft Strategic Plan was reviewed 
by IC and OD Office Directors, and subsequently by 
the NIH Director and Deputy Director. It was then 
reviewed by the DPCPSI Council of Councils and the 
Advisory Committee to the NIH Director. Following 
final review and approval by the NIH Director and 
Deputy Director, and subsequent sign off by the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, the final 
version of the NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for fiscal years 
2021–2025 was posted publicly on NIH’s website and 
widely disseminated to NIH stakeholders.
1 https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-20-064.html
2 https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/02/13/2020-02919/request-for-information-rfi-inviting-comments-
and-suggestions-on-a-framework-for-the-nih-wide
3 https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/nih-wide-strategic-plan
Endnotes

--- PAGE 56 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission', 'Division of '] ---
46
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Appendix IV: NIH Common Fund Strategic 
Plan Report
About the NIH Common Fund
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Common 
Fund1 programs represent time-limited, strategic 
investments in biomedical and behavioral research 
(collectively referred to as biomedical research 
in the remainder of this appendix) designed to 
achieve high-impact goals and catalyze discovery. 
Approximately 30 multidisciplinary scientific programs 
are supported by the NIH Common Fund, spanning 
NIH’s mission and addressing challenges and oppor-
tunities that are of high priority for NIH as a whole. 
These bold scientific programs often accelerate 
emerging science, enhance the biomedical research 
workforce, remove research roadblocks, or support 
high-risk, high-reward science. NIH Common Fund 
programs frequently produce resources—such as 
datasets, tools, technologies, or methods—that are 
designed to spur subsequent biomedical advances 
often not possible otherwise. The work supported by 
the NIH Common Fund is inherently risky, but this risk 
is embraced because of the potential for transfor-
mative impact in advancing science and, ultimately, 
improving human health.
The origins of the NIH Common Fund lie in the NIH 
Roadmap for Medical Research, which was launched 
in 2004. The NIH Reform Act of 2006 created the 
NIH Common Fund as a source of support for these 
transformative, NIH-wide programs within the NIH 
Office of the Director (OD). This established a novel 
approach to support crosscutting, NIH-wide pro-
grams in areas of emerging scientific opportunities, 
rising public health challenges, and knowledge gaps 
that deserved special emphasis or would otherwise 
benefit from strategic planning and coordination. The 
Act also mandated an emphasis on goals and mile-
stones in NIH Common Fund programs and directed 
NIH to encourage participation by early-career 
researchers. 
The Office of Strategic Coordination (OSC) within 
the NIH Division of Program Coordination, Planning, 
and Strategic Initiatives (DPCPSI) is responsible for 
managing the NIH Common Fund. OSC coordinates 
teams across NIH who collectively plan, implement, 
and oversee each program to ensure broad impact. 
Individual awards supported through the NIH 
Common Fund are administered in partnership with 
NIH Institutes and Centers (ICs).
About the NIH Common Fund 
Strategic Plan Report
The Public Health Service Act requires, as part of the 
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan, that the NIH Director submit 
a report to Congress containing a strategic plan for 
funding research “that represents important areas 
of emerging scientific opportunities, rising public 
health challenges, or knowledge gaps that deserve 
special emphasis and would benefit from conducting 
or supporting additional research that involves 
collaboration between two or more national research 
institutes or national centers, or would otherwise 
benefit from strategic coordination and planning” 
through the NIH Common Fund (42 U.S.C. §282a(c)
(1)(C); 282(b)(7)(A)(i)). 
NIH Common Fund Program 
Lifecycle
The congressional mandate to support goal- and 
milestone-driven programs underlies a critical feature 
of NIH Common Fund programs: Each program 
establishes high-impact goals that are expected to be 
achieved within a maximum of 10 years. This program 
enables new needs or opportunities to be supported 
as they emerge. The NIH Common Fund supports 
research programs that

--- PAGE 57 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
47
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Figure 29. Lifecycle of NIH Common Fund Programs
“Common Fund Program Lifecycle”: Infographic. Note that not all programs follow this exact timeline. 
Credit: NIH Common Fund.
Program T ransition
(after ~5–10 years)
Program Implementation
(~5–10 years)
Common Fund Program Lifecycle
Strategic Planning
(~15 months)
Program 
Transition
*Years are approximate; Common Fund programs are supported for a maximum of 10 years.
Program 
Transition
Phase 2
Strategic Planning:
Reﬁnement
(for the second 
stage of 
the program)
Phase 1
Strategic Planning:
Identiﬁcation 
of broad
program areas
Phase 2
Strategic Planning:
Reﬁnement
(for the ﬁrst stage
of the program)
Stage 1
Program
Implementation
(Years 1–5*)
Stage 2
Program 
Implementation
(Years 6–10*)
Ongoing program evaluation enables optimization throughout the lifetime of the program. 
Evaluation
broad biomedical community and that they address 
major roadblocks to research progress. At the com-
pletion of each program, the tools, technologies, and 
data produced by the program are taken up and used 
by the community at large, and the infrastructure that 
the NIH Common Fund has built transitions to other 
sources of support. The lifecycle of a NIH Common 
Fund program is shown in Figure 29. 
NIH Common Fund strategic planning is a two-phase 
process. Phase 1 of strategic planning identifies 
broad areas that are high priorities for NIH and for 
which transformational progress can be envisioned. 
Phase 2 of strategic planning involves analysis 
of the scientific landscape within a given field to 
identify the specific challenges and opportunities for 
progress. Programmatic goals are established, with 
a series of funding initiatives collectively designed to 
achieve those goals. The strategic planning process 
is described in more detail in the next section, “NIH 
Common Fund Strategic Planning Process.” 
Following strategic planning and selection of new 
program areas, research projects addressing goals 
and milestones identified during the planning process 
are supported through a variety of funding mecha-
nisms. Awards are often implemented as partnerships 
among the many scientific investigators supported by 
a program and expert NIH staff, collaboratively work-
ing together to achieve defined goals. NIH Common 
Fund programs are actively managed to ensure that 
the output of each program is maximally useful to 
the broader scientific community. Assessment of the 
utility of the program to the community is emphasized 
and is achieved through a variety of evaluative 
processes. 

--- PAGE 58 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
48
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Figure 30. NIH Common Fund Data  
Ecosystem
NIH Common Fund programs are intended to provide 
resources that accelerate discovery across many differ-
ent biomedical research fields. Often these resources 
include large datasets and associated digital tools 
needed to mine and analyze the data. To maximize 
impact, these datasets and tools must be leveraged 
by researchers from different disciplines, using varying 
expertise in bioinformatics and large-scale data 
analysis. Additionally, these datasets must be usable 
together across interoperable platforms. However, 
current approaches to data storage, management, 
and analysis mean that data are often not findable, 
accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR).
To address this challenge, the NIH Common Fund is 
supporting the NIH Common Fund Data Ecosystem 
(CFDE), an ongoing investment in data management 
infrastructure that will support past, current, and future 
NIH Common Fund datasets.
The CFDE includes several integrated efforts:
• CFDE Coordinating Center—The Coordinating 
Center will manage and organize CFDE activities, 
engage with participating NIH Common Fund pro-
grams, connect with user communities, support 
training, develop tools and standards, and provide 
technical expertise.
• Participating NIH Common Fund Data 
Coordinating Centers—These Centers will work 
with the CFDE Coordinating Center to understand 
its program’s unique requirements for data storage 
and analysis, adopt/adapt guidelines and best 
practices, share resources and tools, establish 
and enable use cases for cross-data analyses, and 
provide training.
• Leveraging NIH-wide cloud service pro-
vider partnerships—Using the Science and 
Technology Research Infrastructure for Discovery, 
Experimentation, and Sustainability (STRIDES) will 
ensure that data are onboarded to the cloud in a 
consistent manner and provide favorable pricing 
for cloud data storage and use. 
Ultimately, the CFDE is intended to amplify the impact 
of many NIH Common Fund programs by enabling 
researchers to interrogate multiple disparate datasets 
and thereby make new kinds of scientific discoveries 
that were not possible before.
Evaluation is an ongoing activity throughout the 
lifecycle of the program and includes both formal 
and informal evaluative activities. Informal evaluation 
involves convening grantees and NIH-wide teams to 
review progress, discuss new challenges, and devel-
op strategies to adapt as part of routine program 
management. It also involves gathering input from 
external consultants and using their input, together 
with internal analysis, to help guide the implementa-
tion of the program. Formal evaluations involve the 
development of baseline data for new programs and 
the development of multiple metrics of outcomes. 
The utility of data, resources, technologies, and other 
program outputs is assessed through surveys, expert 
opinion, and the analysis of bibliometric data, such 
as citation analyses. Challenges and opportunities to 
strengthen each program are considered continuous-
ly, but this assessment is also done systematically for 
every program on an annual basis. This management 
process ensures that the programs stay on track 
toward their stated goals while also allowing adjust-
ments to ensure that the impact of each program is 
maximized.
Another ongoing activity for the NIH Common Fund 
is the support of infrastructure designed to maxim

--- PAGE 59 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'Crosscutting'] ---
49
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
NIH Common Fund Strategic 
Planning Process
Strategic planning for the NIH Common Fund 
involves the identification of NIH-wide challenges and 
opportunities that meet NIH Common Fund program 
criteria
3 (Figure 31). It is designed to be flexible from 
year to year to adapt to emerging opportunities, the 
changing needs of the scientific community, and 
 
the availability of funds. Broad topics identified in 
Phase 1 are r
efined into well-defined programs and 
initiatives in Phase 2. 
Phase 1 identifies broad scientific needs and 
opportunities, focusing on the greatest challenges  
to research discovery and translation, as well as 
on the most pr
omising emerging opportunities 
to catalyze research across a variety of scientific 
disciplines and disease conditions. Although specific 
Phase 1 activities vary, ideas may be gathered 
through meetings with external scientific experts, 
solicitation of ideas from ICs, discussions with 
NIH Leadership and Advisory Committees, and 
engagement with the broader scientific community. 
To effectively evaluate the responsiveness of the 
proposed idea to NIH Common Fund criteria, as well 
as the potential impact of the program, the following 
questions are typically posed:
	 What is the greatest opportunity in biomedical 
research today? How can this opportunity be 
realized?
	 Why is now the right time for this idea (i.e., why 
is this idea timely)?
	 What would be the goals of the program, and 
what initiatives or activities are envisioned to 
achieve these goals? 
Generally, Phase 1 strategic planning activities gen-
erate many more ideas than can be supported. Ideas 
are prioritized by the NIH Director, with input from 
the OSC, DPCPSI, and Principal Deputy Directors. IC 
Directors may also provide input to the NIH Director 
on prioritization of concepts. A small subset of 
prioritized ideas then moves into Phase 2 planning.
Phase 2 refines the prioritized set of broad ideas 
identified in Phase 1 into specific, well-defined 
initiatives. An NIH-wide Working Group representing 
a broad range of interested scientific communities is 
formed to continue the planning process and, if the 
program is approved, lead program implementation. 
Phase 2 strategic planning also occurs before 
decisions are made to provide a second stage of 
support for existing programs. OSC assesses the 
progress of NIH Common Fund programs at the end 
of the first stage of funding to determine whether a 
second stage of funding (up to a limit of 10 years 
total) is necessary to reap maximum benefit from the 
program. The Phase 2 refinement process includes 
analysis of NIH and external scientific research 
portfolios (Figure 32), solicitation of input from 
subject-matter experts, and input from IC Directors.
During Phase 2 planning, the DPCPSI Council of 
Councils (CoC)
4 provides input about whether the 
proposed idea addresses the NIH Common Fund 
criteria and, if so, whether the proposed program 
initiatives are likely to achieve the program goals 
and produce the highest possible impact. When the 
concept for a potential new program is cleared by the 
CoC, the Working Group develops a program propos-
al that clearly describes scientific needs, gaps, and 
opportunities; goals and milestones of the proposed 
program; description of program management; 
and a budget for all years of the program. Program 
proposals are presented to the NIH Director for a final 
de

--- PAGE 60 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
50
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Figure 32. Portfolio Analysis: Focusing Scope and Identifying Opportunities
Portfolio analysis occurs during Phase 2 of the strategic planning process. It is a vital part of strategic planning that 
provides critical information concerning ongoing efforts in areas being considered as potential NIH Common Fund 
programs. Portfolio analysis helps identify specific areas where strategic investment by the NIH Common Fund could 
support unique and potentially transformative research. 
The Somatic Cell Genome Editing (SCGE) program, launched in fiscal year 2018, included a robust portfolio analysis 
during the planning process to identify specific activities in support of the program’s overall goal to advance therapeutic 
use of precision genome editing approaches to treat or cure numerous diseases caused by genetic mutations. With the 
discovery of CRISPR and similar tools that can precisely change genetic sequences, this field experienced an explosion 
of interest. However, remaining gaps in research investment were holding back the translation of genome editing 
approaches into the clinic, especially for rare or uncommon diseases. Information on private-sector and other govern-
ment agency investment was provided by consultation with experts, complementing the SCGE portfolio analysis that 
assessed NIH investment in genome editing tools and technologies in fiscal year 2016. This analysis identified critical 
gap areas, including gene editing reporter systems and in vitro models for testing efficacy and safety. Additionally, the 
analysis demonstrated a pressing need to develop new genome editing tools that were less likely to produce adverse 
or off-target effects. Furthermore, the analysis revealed that current investment in genome editing delivery vehicles 
was highly focused on a single viral vector (adeno-associated virus, or AAV) with inherent limitations. Other delivery 
systems—such as nanoparticles, alternative viruses, ribonucleoprotein complexes, and exosomes—were largely 
overlooked, despite representing potentially transformative approaches to overcoming limitations associated with AAVs. 
The results of this portfolio analysis, combined with expert input, identified areas of scientific opportunity that became 
the basis of the SCGE program initiatives. These initiatives include (1) developing animal models for testing genome 
editing tools; (2) generating assays and models to test the efficacy and safety of genome editing tools; (3) improving 
genome editing delivery systems—including a wide range of delivery systems beyond AAVs—to target specific cells 
and tissues; (4) expanding the number and types of genome editing complexes; and (5) distributing the knowledge and 
resources developed through this program to the scientific community. 
A follow-up analysis conducted in 2020 confirmed that the SCGE program is stimulating research in gap areas identified 
in the baseline portfolio analysis. This analysis showed that the SCGE program is filling an important niche by support-
ing research on exploring the use of exosomes, nanoparticles, and ribonucleoproteins as delivery vehicles. The analysis 
also revealed that the SCGE program is developing genome editing tools that target a wide range of tissues and organs, 
including one organ system (the gastrointestinal tract) that is not targeted by any other NIH-supported genome editing 
projects, as well as other several tissues or 

--- PAGE 61 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
51
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Figure 33. Human BioMolecular Atlas Program 
The Human BioMolecular Atlas Program is a collabo-
rative effort to develop an open and global platform to 
map healthy cells in the human body.  
Credit: NIH Common Fund.
Figure 34. Illuminating the Druggable Genome 
Program
The goal of the Illuminating the Druggable Genome 
program is to compile data about the uncharacterized 
proteins within the four protein classes that are most 
frequently targeted by drugs. 
Credit: NIH Common Fund.
cells within the context of the tissues have made 
the goals of HuBMAP feasible. However, this 
challenge is enormous, given that the human body 
has approximately 37 trillion cells. HuBMAP is 
developing an open and global platform to map 
healthy cells in the human body, coordinating 
with other international efforts. Capitalizing in part 
upon the foundation laid by the NIH Common 
Fund’s Single-Cell Analysis Program,
8 HuBMAP is 
building the framework needed to construct cell 
atlases, tools, and resources to understand the 
function of and relationship among all the cells in 
the human body. This understanding is expected 
to lead to new insights into human health, growth, 
development, aging, and disease. 
•	 Transformative High Resolution Cryo-Electron 
Microscopy (CryoEM)
9—Improvements in cryoEM 
technologies and new computational methods 
to analyze the associated data have created a 
transformative opportunity in structural biology. 
With these new methods, investigators can 
analyze protein structures more easily than ever 
before, providing the basis for smart drug design 
and fundamental biological insights. However, 
the high cost of required equipment and limited 
workforce proficient in this technology represent 
a substantial challenge. The CryoEM program 
addresses this challenge. It is broadening 
access to high-resolution cryoEM for biomedical 
researchers by creating national service centers 
and cultivating a skilled cryoEM workforce by 
developing and implementing cryoEM training 
materials. By expanding access and training for 
cryoEM, this program aims to enable research and 
accelerate development of drugs and vaccines to 
combat many diseases and conditions. 
In addition to launching new programs, several exist-
ing NIH Common Fund programs underwent planning 
for a second stage of support that began in fiscal 
year 2018. These programs are described below:
•	 Illuminating the Druggable Genome (IDG)10 
(Figure 34)—Most drugs target proteins within 
four families: G protein–coupled receptors, nuclear 
receptors, ion channels, and protein kinases. 
However, only a small number of proteins within 
each of these families are well studied, and these 
proteins typically are present in many cells 
throughout the body. Therefore, drugs that target 
these proteins may cause widespread adverse 
effects in cells and tissues that are not affected 
by disease. However, the lesser known members 
of these protein families may be present in fewer 
tissues and thus have potential as specific drug 
targets leading to fewer side effects. Technological 
advances in genomics, protein characterization, 
and computational methods provide an opportuni-
ty to identify and study large numbers of unknown 
proteins. IDG originally launched a pilot stage in 
fiscal year 2014 to compile data about the unchar-
acterized proteins within the four protein classes 
that are most frequently targeted by drugs. In

--- PAGE 62 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
52
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Figure 35. Undiagnosed Diseases Network
The Undiagnosed Diseases Network is a research 
study to improve the level of diagnosis of rare and 
undiagnosed conditions. Credit: NIH Common Fund.
function of uncharacterized proteins within 
three key families: G protein–coupled receptors, 
ion channels, and protein kinases. IDG is also 
expanding the informatics tools developed in the 
pilot stage and disseminating the IDG-generated 
resources to the biomedical research community. 
•	 Metabolomics11—Chemical reactions in the body 
produce small molecules, called metabolites, that 
can provide important information about diet, 
environmental exposures, and drug metabolism. 
The study of all of the metabolites in a given 
sample, or metabolomics, therefore provides a 
powerful tool for researchers and clinicians to 
understand an individual’s current physiological 
state and possibly to develop personalized 
diagnoses and treatment approaches. The NIH 
Common Fund’s Metabolomics program was 
established to support broader use of metabolom-
ic analysis in basic research and in the clinic. The 
first stage of the Metabolomics program contrib-
uted to wider use of metabolomic approaches in 
the biomedical research community and enhanced 
researchers’ ability to conduct metabolic analyses. 
In the second stage, the Metabolomics program 
aims to enhance metabolomics data sharing; 
develop novel tools to facilitate data analysis; and 
generate standards, guidelines, and resources to 
enable metabolomics research. 
•	 Undiagnosed Diseases Network (UDN)12  
(Figure 35
)—Rare diseases collectively affect 
approximately 25 million Americans,13 many of 
whom face a long and frustrating process to 
arrive at a diagnosis. The NIH Intramural Research 
Program launched the Undiagnosed Diseases 
Program (UDP) in 2008 with the goal of diagnos-
ing, understanding, and treating rare disorders. 
This program leveraged revolutionary genomic 
sequencing technologies to aid in the diagnosis of 
rare diseases and developed a robust interdisci-
plinary approach to disease diagnosis that proved 
successful. However, the overwhelming patient 
need far exceeded the capacity of the UDP . In 
2013, the NIH Common Fund launched UDN with 
the goal of expanding the proven approach of 
UDP to academic health centers across the coun-
ty, working through challenges associated with 
implementing this approach in different clinical 
and economic models. UDN promotes the use of 
genomic data in disease diagnosis and engages 
basic researchers to uncover underlying disease 
mechanisms so that treatments can be identified. 
UDN accepted 601 participants undiagnosed by 
traditional medical practices in the first 20 months 
of operation. Of those who completed their UDN 
evaluation during this time, 35 percent were given 
a diagnosis. Many of these diagnoses were rare 
genetic diseases, including 31 previously unknown 
syndromes. In the second stage, UDN is focusing 
on forming a sustainable national resource to 
diagnose both rare and new diseases, advancing 
laboratory and clinical research, enhancing global 
coordination and collaboration among laboratory 
and clinical researchers, and sharing resulting 
data and approaches throughout the scientific and 
clinical communities. 
Strategic Planning 2016–2017
Anticipated budget limitations led to a scaled-down 
strategic planning process in 2016–2017, focused on 
two existing NIH Comm

--- PAGE 63 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'research areas'] ---
53
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Figure 36. Diversity Program Consortium
The Diversity Program Consortium was established to 
develop, implement, assess, and disseminate innova-
tive and effective training and mentoring approaches to 
enhance the participation and persistence of individuals 
from underrepresented backgrounds in biomedical 
research careers so that future programs may be more 
effective at recruiting and retaining a diverse workforce. 
Credit: NIH Common Fund.
in biomedical research careers so that future 
programs may be more effective at recruiting 
and retaining a diverse workforce. Launched 
with planning grants in 2013, the first stage of 
the program had three initiatives: (1) Building 
Infrastructure Leading to Diversity (BUILD), which 
is developing approaches to determine the most 
effective ways to engage and retain students 
from diverse backgrounds in biomedical research 
and to prepare students to become future con-
tributors to the NIH-funded research enterprise; 
(2) the National Research Mentoring Network, 
a national network of mentors and mentees 
providing mentorship, professional development, 
training, networking, and resources; and (3) the 
Coordination and Evaluation Center, which is 
coordinating and evaluating DPC activities. In 
the second stage of the program, two additional 
initiatives are being supported. The Sponsored 
Programs Administration Development program 
aims to increase the productivity of sponsored 
programs offices (or similar entities) at academic 
institutions to enhance biomedical research 
and research training. The DPC Dissemination 
and Translation Awards (DPC DaTA) supports 
non-DPC institutions to employ DPC methods 
to evaluate the effectiveness of a biomedical 
research training, mentoring, or research 
 
capacity-building intervention. 
•	 Extracellular RNA Communication (ERC)16—Once 
thought to exist only inside cells, RNA is now 
known to travel outside cells and play a role in 
communication among cells throughout the body. 
When the ERC program was launched in 2013, 
researchers understood that RNA was exported 
from cells, but fundamental questions about the 
function of these extracellular RNAs (exRNAs), 
how exRNAs are targeted to deliver messages to 
other cells, and how exRNAs are regulated had 
yet to be fully explored. Additionally, a lack of 
standards, protocols, and data infrastructure was 
a significant roadblock that hindered research 
progress and prevented comparison of experi-
ments between different laboratories. The ERC 
program aimed to enable researchers to tackle 
fundamental questions about exRNAs in a coor-
dinated way, thereby establishing new biological 
paradigms and accelerating development of 
exRNAs as potential therapeutics or in diagnos-
tics. The first stage of this program catalogued 
exRNA molecules found in human biofluids from 
more than 2,000 healthy donors; established data 
standards, created a data portal, and developed 
novel tools and reagents; and identified potential 
exRNA biomarkers for nearly 30 diseases. In the 
second stage of the program, ERC is focusing 
on tool and technology development addressing 
major roadblocks to understanding exRNAs, 
including better understanding of the larger 
complexes, like extracellular vesicles that carry 
exRNAs through the body. 
Strategic Planning 2017–2018
In 2017, NIH leadership identified two timely, high-
priority research areas suitable for NIH Common 
Fu

--- PAGE 64 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'crosscutting'] ---
54
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Figure 37. Somatic Cell Genome Editing  
Program
The Somatic Cell Genome Editing program is working 
to improve the efficacy and specificity of gene editing 
approaches to help reduce the burden of common and 
rare diseases caused by genetic changes. 
Credit: NIH Common Fund.
by developing a set of objective biomarkers (i.e., 
a “signature”) to predict susceptibility for transi-
tioning to chronic pain after an acute pain event. 
The A2CPS program enhances the objectives of 
the NIH Helping to End Addiction Long-term
SM 
(HEAL) Initiative,18 a transagency effort to speed 
scientific solutions to end the opioid public health 
crisis. A2CPS will benefit the HEAL
SM research 
priority to enhance pain management. Building 
upon previous efforts by the NIH Pain Consortium 
and others, this program was well positioned to 
rapidly launch in advance of HEAL
SM but is now 
fully coordinated with HEALSM initiatives. It began 
a planning stage in fiscal year 2019, scaling up to 
implementation in fiscal year 2020. 
•	 Somatic Cell Genome Editing (SCGE)19  
(Figure 37)—The development of tools and 
approaches to precisely change genomic 
sequences, including CRISPR, have raised the 
possibility of a fundamentally new approach to 
treat an enormous number of genetic diseases. 
Capitalizing on the rapidly expanding field of 
precision genome editing tools, planning for the 
SCGE program identified several critical areas in 
need of strategic investment to accelerate devel-
opment of new genome editing–based therapies. 
Significant ongoing investments were advancing 
this nascent field but were largely focused on 
ex vivo genome editing approaches, in which 
cells are edited outside of the body and then 
reintroduced; in vivo approaches involving editing 
cells within the body were lagging behind, despite 
applicability to a larger number of diseases. 
Additionally, a significant technological challenge 
was targeting the editing machinery to the 
appropriate cells and avoiding off-target effects. 
Building upon these opportunities and challenges, 
the SCGE program aims to improve the efficacy 
and specificity of gene editing approaches to help 
reduce the burden of common and rare diseases 
caused by genetic changes. SCGE is developing 
tools to perform and assess effective and safe 
genome editing in nonreproductive (i.e., somatic) 
cells of the body, including approaches to ensure 
genome editing tools are delivered specifically to 
the targeted cell type within the body. By sharing 
these resources with the entire research com-
munity, SCGE aims to reduce the time and cost 
required to develop new therapies. An accelerated 
planning process that brought together thought 
leaders from academia, industry, and government 
allowed this program to be quickly launched in 
fiscal year 2018. 
Additionally, discussions between NIH leadership 
and IC Directors revealed enthusiasm for developing 
high-priority initiatives that extend from existing NIH 
Common Fund programs and leverage previous 
investments. Within the CryoEM program, a new 
effort was developed to increase access to cryo-
 
electron tomography, a r
elated technology that 
enables improved imaging of molecules within intact 
cells and tissues in 3-D. Additional efforts to address 
the opioid public health crisis were supported through 
an expansion of the Stimulating Peripheral Activity to 
Relieve Conditions (SPARC)
20 program, launching

--- PAGE 65 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
55
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
workshops was the emerging opportunities presented 
by integration of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine 
learning approaches into biomedical research. 
Independently, in recognition of the opportunity and 
challenges posed by AI in biomedicine, NIH orga-
nized a workshop in July 2018, Harnessing Artificial 
Intelligence and Machine Learning to Advance 
Biomedical Research.
22 These initial discussions 
contributed to additional planning activities and, ulti-
mately, a new NIH Common Fund program in AI (see 
the next section, “Strategic Planning 2019–2020,” for 
more details). 
In addition to input gathered through the journal 
editor workshops, OSC also solicited ideas from IC 
Directors. From this process, three ideas emerged 
that are now being pursued as potential NIH Common 
Fund programs. 
•	 Harnessing Data Science for Health Discovery 
and Innovation in Africa
23—This program will 
leverage data science technologies and prior 
NIH investments to develop solutions to Africa’s 
most pressing public health problems through a 
robust ecosystem of new partners from academic, 
government, and private sectors. Extensive 
mobile phone coverage in Africa provides an 
opportunity to rapidly advance health care delivery 
systems through mobile health applications, 
point-of-care technologies, and self-management 
systems. Additionally, this program leverages 
and builds upon substantial investment in African 
research and research training by NIH ICs, the 
NIH Common Fund, and other organizations. 
For example, the Data Science in Africa program 
will build on and translate the resources and 
expertise developed through the Human Heredity 
and Health in Africa
24 program into products and 
policies impacting health in Africa and around 
the world. The program aims to promote sustain-
ability of the African health research enterprise 
by encouraging robust partnerships with African 
governmental, private, and academic partners and 
will also consider ethical, legal, and social issues 
for data science research and its applications 
to public health in Africa. This program was 
approved by the NIH Director and is anticipated to 
launch in fiscal year 2021. 
•	 Faculty Institutional Recruitment for Sustainable 
Transformation (FIRST)
25—Despite ongoing 
investment in programs designed to enhance 
the diversity of the biomedical workforce, 
underrepresentation of some racial and ethnic 
groups, particularly at the faculty level, remains a 
persistent challenge. Many previous efforts have 
focused on individuals; however, substantial evi-
dence suggests that targeting institutional culture 
change is needed to achieve the desired results. 
Early success of the NIH Distinguished Scholars 
Program
26 and other cohort-based recruitment 
programs indicates that recruitment of a critical 
mass of investigators committed to diversity and 
inclusion may foster the institutional changes 
needed to create meaningful changes in diversity 
at the faculty level. The FIRST program aims to 
create cultures of inclusive excellence at NIH-
funded institutions, establishing and maintaining 
scientific environments that can cultivate and 
benefit from a full range of talent. It will establish 
a faculty cohort model for hiring, mentoring, and 
professional development; integrated, institu-
tion-wide approaches to address bias, faculty 
equity, mentoring, and work-life issues; and a 
coordination and eva

--- PAGE 66 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'research area'] ---
56
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Figure 38. Artificial Intelligence for BiomedicaL Excellence Program
Following a 2018 NIH workshop on artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning in biomedical research, the NIH 
Director formed the Advisory Committee to the NIH Director (ACD) Working Group on Artificial Intelligence. This group 
was charged with determining opportunities for NIH-wide efforts in AI and ways these efforts could cross biomedical 
topics to positively affect diverse fields, identifying ways for NIH to build connections between the data science and 
biomedical research communities, defining approaches to cross-training computer scientists and biomedical research-
ers, and identifying ethical consideration for biomedical research and AI. 
This working group delivered its final recommendations in December 2019. Several of these recommendations fit well 
with the criteria for NIH Common Fund programs, whereas other recommendations were within the mandate of the NIH’s 
Office of Data Science Strategy. An NIH-wide working group convened and conducted planning activities to determine 
how an NIH Common Fund program could effectively address the relevant recommendations, leading to development 
of the Artificial Intelligence for BiomedicaL Excellence (AIBLE) program. The overall goal of this program is to generate 
new biomedically relevant datasets amenable to machine learning analysis at scale, achieved through the following 
initiatives:
• Support data design centers to generate rubrics of amenability to machine learning approaches that allow the 
evaluation of datasets and plans to generate datasets, create infrastructure to disseminate tools, and host and 
promote datasets.  
• Develop software and firmware tools to accelerate AI readiness.
• Enhance existing data generation efforts to improve AI readiness.
• Generate gold-standard, multimodal human datasets that adhere to the rubrics established by the program.
• Use the rubrics to evaluate and update select existing public biomedical research data.
Because this potential program leveraged the carefully developed recommendations from the ACD working group, it is 
anticipated to launch on an accelerated timeline in fiscal year 2021.
the NIH community for bold investments that could 
become future NIH Common Fund programs. The 
community was also encouraged to provide construc-
tive comments on ideas submitted by others, so that 
each idea could benefit from the collective expertise 
of the NIH community. In addition to gathering ideas 
through the crowdsourcing site, IC Directors were 
also invited to submit ideas.
From this process, one idea focused on exploring 
transposable elements and somatic mosaicism was 
selected for further development. This potential 
program, Somatic Mosaicism and Retrotranspositions 
(SMaRt), would investigate genetic elements that 
make up approximately half of the human genome 
and which, in some cases, have the ability to move 
within the genome and thereby create genetically 
distinct cells within a single individual. This mobility 
can result in genomic damage and disease, but 
the extent to which this process happens and how 
it is regulated is largely unknown. If approved, the 
SMaRT program would aim to deliver new paradigms 
concerning the regulation of these elements and how 
their transposition contributes to normal biology and 
disease. Pending approval, this program is anticipat-
ed to launch in fiscal year 2

--- PAGE 67 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
57
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Figure 39. Transition of the Human Microbiome Project
The Human Microbiome Project (HMP), supported by the NIH Common Fund from 2007 to 2016, developed numerous 
research resources to enable the study of the microbial communities that live in and on the human body and the roles 
these communities play in health and disease. The first stage of HMP developed DNA sequence datasets and computa-
tional tools for characterizing the microbiome in healthy adults and in people with microbiome-associated diseases. The 
second stage of HMP created integrated datasets of multiple biological properties from both the microbiome and the 
host over time in people with specific microbiome-associated diseases. 
HMP was an extremely successful program. Some of its major accomplishments include sequencing approximately 
3,000 reference bacterial genomes isolated from the human body; generating a comprehensive profile of the healthy 
human microbiome; developing integrated datasets of metagenomic, transcript, protein, and metabolite profiles from 
microbiome and host in multiple human cohorts; developing software and online resources to enable studies of the 
microbiome; and publication of more than 700 scientific papers. 
HMP helped catalyze the nascent field of microbiome research, laying the foundation for continued NIH investment 
through the Institutes and Centers (ICs) after the program ended. NIH investment in microbiome research outside of 
HMP has increased more than 40-fold since the inception of HMP and now spans more than 20 ICs. The Trans-NIH 
Microbiome Working Group was established in 2012 to provide a forum for coordinating NIH research activities 
related to the human microbiome. Ongoing access to critical HMP resources, including datasets and digital tools, will 
be accomplished through the Common Fund Data Ecosystem (CFDE). Inclusion of these resources within the CFDE 
ensures that the biomedical research community continues to benefit from HMP and that investment in HMP is lever-
aged for maximum possible impact.
Strategic Planning 2020–2021
OSC is currently beginning a new round of strategic 
planning in 2020. Still in the early stages of develop-
ment, this round of strategic planning is intended to 
leverage existing community-generated white papers 
(i.e., assessments of scientific opportunities and 
needs in a given scientific area). By reviewing these 
thoughtful analyses from many scientific societies or 
other groups, NIH may obtain well-considered input 
that reflects consensus views and that may reveal 
overlapping challenges and opportunities affecting 
multiple communities. Potential program concepts 
will also be solicited from the IC Directors and may 
arise from discussions involving NIH leadership, 
Advisory Councils, or other entities providing input 
 
to NIH.
Planning for Transition from NIH 
Common Fund Support
NIH Common Fund programs are designed to 
achieve a set of high-impact goals within a defined 
time frame. At the conclusion of each program, deliv-
erables will either stimulate IC-funded research or will 
transition to support by ICs or other entities that find 
the resources generated by the program useful.
Transition plans are considered early in the lifecycle of 
an NIH Common Fund program, and these plans are 
reconsidered throughout the lifecycle to ensure the 
transition accommodates the changing needs of both 
the program and the external scientific

--- PAGE 68 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'research areas', 'Division of '] ---
58
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Table 1: The NIH Common Fund Budget, Fiscal Years 2018–2021
Fiscal Year 
2018 Actual
Fiscal Year 
2019 Actual
Fiscal Year 2020 
Actual
Fiscal Year 2021 
President’s Budget 
Request
a
NIH Common Fund (dollars in 
millions) $600.7 $619.2 $639.1 $596.5
NIH Common Fund 
Percentage of NIH Labor/U.S. 
Department of Health and 
Human Services Funding
b
1.62% 1.59% 1.54% 1.54%
a Includes March 17, 2020, budget amendment of $439.584 million for the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. 
b Excludes mandatory funding for the Type 1 Diabetes Research program and funding appropriated through the Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies 
Appropriations Act for the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Superfund Research Program. Includes program evaluation financing resources.
The NIH Common Fund Budget
The NIH Common Fund budget for fiscal years 
2018–2021 is shown in Table 1. Although NIH 
Common Fund programs are planned in advance, the 
specific activities funded in each program depend on 
the budget made available through annual appropri-
ations. As programs end, funds are freed to support 
new programs and planned expansions of ongoing 
programs. 
The Public Health Service Act requires that the NIH 
Common Fund Strategic Plan Report include an 
estimate of amounts needed for (i) maximizing the 
potential of the Common Fund research under 42 
U.S.C. 282(b)(7)(A)(i); (ii) to be sufficient only for con-
tinuing to fund research activities previously identified 
by the Division of Program Coordination, Planning, 
and Strategic Initiatives; and (iii) to be necessary 
to fund research described in 42 U.S.C. 282(b)(7)
(A)(i) that (1) is in addition to the research activities 
described in clause (ii) and (2) for which there is the 
most substantial need. See 42 U.S.C. 282a(c)(1)(C).
Budgets for ongoing NIH Common Fund programs 
are planned in advance to maximize the potential of 
all programs. Therefore, the amounts described in (i) 
and (ii) are the same and are equal to the total budget 
for all NIH Common Fund programs. In addition to the 
amount for ongoing NIH Common Fund programs, 
funds are available for new initiatives each year. 
These new initiatives are identified by the strategic 
planning principles outlined in this report, thus 
ensuring they address research areas of substantial 
need. Within each of the programmatic areas identi-
fied through strategic planning, the NIH peer review 
process also identifies specific research proposals 
addressing areas of substantial need. Therefore, the 
amounts described in (iii) are equal to the amount 
reserved for new NIH Common Fund initiatives.
Each year, as part of the President’s Budget Request, 
the NIH Common Fund describes both the amounts 
estimated for each ongoing program (i and ii) and the 
amounts budgeted for new initiatives (iii). Table 2 
 
shows the estimates presented in the Fiscal Year 
2021 Pr
esident’s Budget Request; prior years’ 
Requests can be found at https://commonfund.nih.
gov/about/budgetrequests.

--- PAGE 69 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
59
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Table 2: NIH Common Fund President’s Budget Request, Fiscal Year 2021
NIH Common Fund Program
(Dollars in Thousands)
 Fiscal Year 
2019 Final 
 Fiscal Year 
2020 Enacted 
 Fiscal 
Year 2021 
President’s 
Budget Request 
4D Nucleome  27,997 28,860 27,485
Acute to Chronic Pain Signatures 2,094 16,636 14,648
Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K) 2,605 0 0
Enhancing the Diversity of the NIH-Funded Workforce 52,656 53,713 47,401
Extracellular RNA Communication 6,728 5,846 10,497
Gabriella Miller Kids First Pediatric Research 13,482 13,000 13,000
Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) Resources 772 0 0
Global Health 15,569 11,565 9,261
Glycoscience 19,435 13,362 5,191
Health Care Systems Research Collaboratory   1,988 1,750 1,694
High-Risk Research 206,110 193,100 186,001
NIH Director’s Pioneer Award 45,446 54,265 51,293
NIH Director’s New Innovator Award Program 102,692 77,815 79,795
Transformative Research Award 35,149 38,402 34,659
NIH Director’s Early Independence Award Program 22,823 22,618 20,255
Human BioMolecular Atlas Project (HuBMAP) 15,005 27,031 31,040
Illuminating the Druggable Genome 12,970 13,390 12,971
Knockout Mouse Phenotyping Program 13,757 11,000 0
Library of Integrated Network-Based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) 9,946 87 0
Metabolomics 12,403 12,401 12,000
Molecular Transducers of Physical Activity 44,744 46,126 42,609
New Models of Data Stewardship 199 0 0
NIH Center for Regenerative Medicine (NCRM) 7,597 5,700 0
Protein Capture 1,334 0 0
Science of Behavior Change 12,674 222 0
Somatic Cell Genome Editing 33,324 38,937 44,232
S.P .A.R.C. - Stimulating Peripheral Activity to Relieve Conditions 51,559 47,268 41,883
Strengthening the Biomedical Research Workforce 56 0 0
Transformative High Resolution Cryo-Electron Microscopy (CryoEM) 14,895 51,800 36,290
Undiagnosed Diseases Network 29,207 24,401 21,683
Strategic Planning, Evaluation, and Infrastructure 10,061 22,917 21,129
Subtotal NIH Common Fund 619,166 639,111 579,017
New Initiatives in NIH Common Fund 0 0 17,450
Total NIH Common Fund 619,166 639,111 596,467

--- PAGE 70 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
60
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
4 https://dpcpsi.nih.gov/council.
5 https://www.congress.gov/114/plaws/publ255/PLAW-114publ255.pdf.
6 https://commonfund.nih.gov/sites/default/files/2015%20Common%20Fund%20Strategic%20Planning%20Report_
final%20-%20508.pdf.
7 https://commonfund.nih.gov/HuBMAP. 
8 https://commonfund.nih.gov/Singlecell. 
9 https://commonfund.nih.gov/CryoEM.
10 https://commonfund.nih.gov/IDG.
11 https://commonfund.nih.gov/metabolomics.
12 https://commonfund.nih.gov/Diseases.
13 https://archives.nih.gov/asites/report/09-09-2019/report.nih.gov/nihfactsheets/ViewFactSheete790.html?c-
sid=126&key=R#R. 
14
 https://commonfund.nih.gov/diversity.
15 https://acd.od.nih.gov/documents/reports/DiversityBiomedicalResearchWorkforceReport.pdf. 
16 https://commonfund.nih.gov/exrna.
17 https://commonfund.nih.gov/pain.
18 https://heal.nih.gov.
19 https://commonfund.nih.gov/editing.
20 https://commonfund.nih.gov/sparc.
21 https://commonfund.nih.gov/sites/default/files/Journal_Editors_Workshop_Exec_Summary_508.pdf.
22 https://datascience.nih.gov/community/2018biomedAI.
23 https://commonfund.nih.gov/AfricaData.
24 https://h3africa.org.
25 https://commonfund.nih.gov/first.
26 https://diversity.nih.gov/programs-partnerships/dsp. 
27 https://acd.od.nih.gov/documents/presentations/12132019AI.pdf.
28 https://dpcpsi.nih.gov/sites/default/files/CoC_May_2020_1.05PM_Concept_Clearance_AIBLE_Brennan_508.pdf.
29 https://commonfund.nih.gov/hmp.
Endnotes
1 https://commonfund.nih.gov.
2 https://commonfund.nih.gov/dataecosystem.
3 https://commonfund.nih.gov/sites/default/files/Initiatives_6-28-11.pdf.

--- PAGE 71 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'Division of '] ---
61
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Appendix V: Acronyms
3-D three-dimensional
A2CPS Acute to Chronic Pain Signatures
ABCD Adolescent Brain Cognitive 
Development
ACTIV Accelerating COVID-19 Therapeutic 
Interventions and Vaccines
AFREhealth African Forum for Research and 
Education in Health
AHRQ Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality
AI artificial intelligence
AIBLE Artificial Intelligence for BiomedicaL 
Excellence
AMD age-related macular degeneration
AMP Accelerating Medicines Partnership
AMP-AD AMP-Alzheimer’s Disease 
AMP-PD AMP-Parkinson’s Disease
AMP-RA/
Lupus
AMP-Rheumatoid Arthritis/Lupus 
AMP-T2D AMP-Type 2 Diabetes
ASSIST Application Submission System & 
Interface for Submission Tracking
BIRCWH Building Interdisciplinary Research 
Careers in Women’s Health
BRAIN Brain Research through Advancing 
Innovative Neurotechnologies
®
BUILD Building Infrastructure Leading to 
Diversity
CAR chimeric antigen receptor
CC NIH Clinical Center
CDC Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention
CFDE Common Fund Data Ecosystem 
CIT Center for Information Technology
ClinGen Clinical Genome
CoC Council of Councils
CORD-19 COVID-19 Open Research Dataset
COVID-19 coronavirus disease 2019
cryoEM cryo-electron microscopy
CSR Center for Scientific Review
CTSA Clinical and Translational Science 
Awards
DASH Data and Biospecimen Hub 
DoD U.S. Department of Defense
DPC Diversity Program Consortium
DPC DaTA DPC Dissemination and Translation 
Awards
DPCPSI Division of Program Coordination, 
Planning, and Strategic Initiatives
DR2 Disaster Research Response
DRC Democratic Republic of the Congo
ECHO Environmental influences on Child 
Health Outcomes
ENCODE ENCyclopedia of DNA Elements
ERC extracellular RNA communication
ERM Enterprise Risk Management
EVD Ebola virus disease
exRNA extracellular RNA
FAIR findable, accessible, interoperable, 
and reusable
FDA U.S. Food and Drug Administration
FIC Fogarty International Center
FIRST Faculty Institutional Recruitment for 
Sustainable Transformation
FOIA Freedom of Information Act
GACD Global Alliance for Chronic Diseases 
GBD Global Burden of Disease
H3Africa Human Heredity and Health in Africa 
Consortium

--- PAGE 72 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'Vision'] ---
62
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
HEAL Helping to End Addiction  
Long-termSM
HHS U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services
HMP Human Microbiome Project
HRSA Health Resources and Services 
Administration
HuBMAP Human BioMolecular Atlas Program
IC Institute and Center
IDeA Institutional Development Award
IDG Illuminating the Druggable Genome
IMPROVE Implementing a Maternal health and 
PRegnancy Outcomes Vision for 
Everyone
INCLUDE INvestigation of Co-occurring 
conditions across the Lifespan to 
Understand Down syndromE
IPRCC Interagency Pain Research 
Coordinating Committee
iPSC induced pluripotent stem cell
ISS-NL International Space Station  
U.S. National Laboratory
MOSAIC Maximizing Opportunities 
for Scientific and Academic 
Independent Careers
MoTrPAC Molecular Transducers of Physical 
Activity Consortium
NARI Native American Research 
Internship
NASA National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration
NCATS National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences
NCCIH National Center for Complementary 
and Integrative Health
NCD noncommunicable diseases
NCI National Cancer Institute
NEI National Eye Institute
NGRI Next Generation Researchers 
Initiative
NHGRI National Human Genome Research 
Institute
NHLBI National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute
NIA National Institute on Aging
NIAAA National Institute on Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism
NIAID National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases
NIAMS National Institute of Arthritis and 
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
NIBIB National Institute of Biomedical 
Imaging and Bioengineering
NICHD Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development
NIDA National Institute on Drug Abuse
NIDCD National Institute on Deafness and 
Other Communication Disorders
NIDCR National Institute of Dental and 
Craniofacial Research
NIDDK National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases
NIEHS National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences
NIGMS National Institute of General Medical 
Sciences
NIH National Institutes of Health
NIH 
RePORTER
NIH Research Portfolio Online 
Reporting Tools Expenditures and 
Results
NIMH National Institute of Mental Health
NIMHD National Institute on Minority Health 
and Health Disparities
NINDS National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke
NINR National Institute of Nursing 
Research
NLM National Library of Medicine
OD NIH Office of the Director
OSC Office of Strategic Coordination
PALM
Pamoja Tulinde Maisha
PATH Population Assessment of Tobacco 
and Health 

--- PAGE 73 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
63
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
PHS Public Health Service
PMC PubMed Central
PPP public–private partnership
PRGLAC Pregnant Women and Lactating 
Women
RCDC Research, Condition, and Disease 
Classification
RCMI Research Centers in Minority 
Institutions
RFI Request for Information
SAMHSA Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration
SARS-CoV-2 severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2
SCAP Single Cell Analysis Program
SCD sickle cell disease
SCDIC Sickle Cell Disease Implementation 
Consortium
SCGE Somatic Cell Genome Editing
SEER Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End 
Results
SGM sexual and gender minority
SIG Shared Instrumentation Grant
SMaRt Somatic Mosaicism and 
Retrotranspositions
SPARC Stimulating Peripheral Activity to 
Relieve Conditions
SPRINT Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention 
Trial
SSC Symptom Science Center
STRIDES Science and Technology Research 
Infrastructure for Discovery, 
Experimentation, and Sustainability
TRSP Tobacco Regulatory Science 
Program
UDN Undiagnosed Diseases Network
UDP Undiagnosed Diseases Program
VA U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

--- PAGE 74 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'vision', 'Division of '] ---
64
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025
Acknowledgments
The NIH-Wide Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2021–2025 is the product of many contributors. The NIH 
Director would like to thank the following stakeholders, committees, and staff for their time and effort in 
helping to develop this Strategic Plan.
•	 We would like to thank the NIH-Wide Strategic Working Group, whose enthusiasm, knowledge, and 
commitment made this document possible: Elizabeth Baden, Julie Frost Bellgowan, Michelle Bennett, 
Laura Berkson, David Bochner, Laura Brockway-Lunardi, Thomas Calder, Cindy Caughman, Mindy Chai, 
Stephanie Clipper, Laura Cole, Christine Cooper, Stephanie Courchesne-Schlink, Jessica Creery, Ned 
Culhane, Hope Cummings, Charles Dearolf, Clarence Dukes, Deborah Duran, Yvette Edghill Spano, 
Nicole Garbarini, Taylor Gilliland, Shefa Gordon, John Grason, Rebecca Hong, Cristina Kapustij, Edmund 
Keane, Mary Beth Kester, David Kosub, Ira Kukic, Erica Landis, Charlene Le Fauve, Issel Anne Lim, Ryan 
Mahon, Rebecca Meseroll, Wynn Meyer, Lara Miller, Kathryn Morris, Kate Nagy, Patty Newman, Sheila 
Newton, Rosanna Ng, Samia Noursi, Eileen Oni, Wilma Peterman Cross, Kamilah Rashid, Reaya Reuss, 
Sarah Rhodes, David Saeger, Leigh Samsel, Claire Schulkey, Paul Scott, Ching-Yi Shieh, Kelly Singel, 
Tyrone Spady, Erin Spaniol, Meredith Stein, Daniel Stimson, Nathaniel Stinson, Denise Stredrick, Rachel 
Sturke, Meredith D. Temple-O’Connor, Kimberly Thigpen Tart, Leslie Thompson, Valerie Virta, Marina 
Volkov, Julie Wallace, Elizabeth Walsh, Bridget Williams-Simmons, Nora Wong.
•	 In addition, we thank those across NIH who took the time to review the Framework and draft Strategic 
Plan and provide content. This includes Institute, Center, and OD Office Directors and staff.
•	 We would like to thank the NIH Advisory Committee to the Director and the NIH Division of Program 
Coordination, Planning, and Strategic Initiatives Council of Councils for their insightful feedback on 
the Framework and draft Strategic Plan.
•	 Finally, we are enormously appreciative of the robust input into the strategic planning process 
from stakeholder communities, including members of the scientific and health care communities, 
professional societies, advocacy organizations, industry, other federal agencies, and the general public. 
We look forward to your continued involvement as NIH works to implement the vision outlined here.
