# NINDS (Interim2025-2026) — file: NINDS_Interim_Strategic_Plan_2025-2026.pdf
# 23 pages matched priority-heading patterns


--- PAGE 1 matched=['Strategic \nPlan'] ---
National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke (NINDS)  
Interim Strategic 
Plan 
2025-2026 Investing in the Future of Neuroscience 

--- PAGE 2 matched=['Table of Contents'] ---
1 
Table of Contents 
Message from the Directors .......................................................................................................................... 2 
About NINDS .................................................................................................................................................. 5 
Science: Support and perform rigorous and important neuroscience research........................................... 7 
Understanding the Brain, Spinal Cord, Peripheral Nerves, and Neuromuscular System .......................... 7 
Understanding the Basic Mechanisms of Neurological Disorders ............................................................ 8 
Seeing More Precisely – Biomarkers and Outcome Measures ................................................................. 8 
Improving Treatments ............................................................................................................................... 9 
Preventing Neurological Disorders .......................................................................................................... 11 
Eliminating Neurological Health Disparities ............................................................................................ 11 
Cross-cutting Strategies ........................................................................................................................... 12 
Training and Workforce Development : Fund and conduct neuroscience research training and career 
development programs to ensure a vibrant and talented, neuroscience workforce. ................................ 17 
Scientific Training ..................................................................................................................................... 18 
Mentorship .............................................................................................................................................. 19 
Professional Development....................................................................................................................... 19 
Communications: Promote dynamic communication and broadstakeholder engagement to accelerate 
scientific progress and reduce the burden of neurological disorders. ........................................................ 20 
Reach and Impact .................................................................................................................................... 20 
Timeliness, Clarity, and Transparency ..................................................................................................... 21 
Dissemination .......................................................................................................................................... 22 
Workforce Culture: Create and sustain a supportive work culture for the NINDS workforce that becomes 
the model for biomedical research and the neuroscience community. ..................................................... 23 
Performance Management...................................................................................................................... 23 
Supportive Workforce Culture................................................................................................................. 24 
Communication and Collaboration .......................................................................................................... 24 
Employee Work-Life Satisfaction ...........................................

--- PAGE 3 matched=['strategic plan'] ---
   
 
2 
 
Note to readers: This strategic plan was launched in May 2021. In June of 2025 NIH updated elements 
of the strategic plan to comply with the current Administration’s priorities and Executive Orders. This 
Interim Strategic Plan will be in effect until a new plan is released.  
Message from the Directors 
Neurological disorders—that is, diseases of the brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves, and neuromuscular 
system—inflict an enormous toll of lost life, disability, and suffering on people of all ages throughout the 
United States and the world [see Burden of Neurological Disorders below].  Furthermore, the need for 
progress is growing more urgent.  Brain disorders are becoming more common with the aging of our 
population, the high prevalence of poorly treated chronic pain is a major factor in the opioid crisis, and 
health disparities persist despite encouraging overall progress against many diseases.  
There are formidable barriers to progress.  Foremost among them is our limited knowledge of how the 
normal brain, spinal cord and nerves develop, process information, become susceptible to aging 
processes, respond and recover after injury, and integrate into the workings of a host of other body 
systems.  Despite the challenges, over the 70 years since Congress established the Institute, research 
has driven remarkable advances in fundamental knowledge of how the nervous system works and in the 
diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of neurological disorders and diseases.  When the Institute was 
born in 1950, how neurons generated electrical impulses or communicated with one another was still a 
mystery.  Scientists can now explain these phenomena with intricate detail, leading to many advances 
for people with neurological conditions.  Then as now, millions suffered from an astonishing variety of 
perplexing, troublesome, and debilitating signs and symptoms.  Neurologists and neurosurgeons 
provided a diagnosis based largely on clinical observation and too often had little to offer beyond a 
diagnosis and a grim prognosis.  Now, we are on the cusp of mapping the human brain in its exquisite 
complexity and can monitor the electrical activity of a million neurons simultaneously in an awake, 
behaving mouse.  Dramatic advances in brain imaging, the advent of genetic testing, and development 
of many diagnostic tools augment clinical observation, often eliminating the years-long diagnostic 
odysseys that families endured in the past.  Moreover, research has brought effective options when 
before there were none for common diseases including multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy, 
migraine, and acute stroke.  Experimental treatments using combinations of devices, drugs, and 
rehabilitation, together with extraordinary persistence, have even enabled a few people paralyzed with 
spinal cord injuries to stand and take their first steps.  Most recently a remarkable new approach for 
treating infantile spinal muscular atrophy, a fatal genetic disorder, has opened the door to an entirely 
new armamentarium to treat neurologic disorders.  For stroke, breakthroughs in emergency treatments 
improve outcomes for many people, and, with major improvements in stroke prevention, the age 
adjusted stroke death rate has fallen by more than 70 percent since NINDS was established, according to 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), saving millions of people from premature 
disability and death.  
NINDS alone is not

--- PAGE 4 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
   
 
3 
 
some advances, NINDS led research from early laboratory studies in animals through definitive clinical 
trials.  In other breakthroughs, the Institute supported proof-of-concept demonstrations in experimental 
animals that sufficiently “de-risked” innovative therapeutic development strategies to attract private 
sector investment.  NINDS research also identifies risk factors that guide prevention through 
epidemiological studies, develops diagnostic tools and biomarkers for targeting of interventions to 
people who will benefit, creates and distributes research reagents and resources, and validates clinical 
outcome measures to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions.  NINDS supports training of the 
nation’s neuroscience research workforce and disseminates timely and accurate information about 
neurological disorders to the research community, physicians, and the public. Most importantly, 
researchers in the public and private sector agree that NIH basic research on the nervous system in 
health and disease is the wellspring of progress.      
Although we have come a long way, there is a long way to go.  Drugs can treat the symptoms of 
Parkinson’s disease, but do not slow the inexorable death of brain cells, nor has any treatment been 
proven to halt the progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Huntington’s disease, or many 
types of dementia.  No existing therapies are effective for about a third of people with epilepsy, 
prevention of epilepsy is still elusive, and all anti-seizure drugs carry troublesome side effects.  Although 
advances in critical care have improved survival from severe traumatic brain injury (TBI), dozens of 
clinical trials of treatments have failed to improve long-term outcomes for those who survive, nor do we 
fully understand the long-term consequences of mild TBI (concussions).  The lack of effective non-
addictive treatments for acute and chronic pain affects millions of people and is a major driver of the 
opioid crisis.  After decades of progress, stroke rates are now increasing for some segments of our 
population, and substantial disparities persist.  For hundreds of genetic disorders, many of which affect 
infants and children, we now know the genes responsible but have no disease modifying therapy.  The 
imperative for progress is evident every day to people affected by neurological disorders, their families, 
and the physicians who treat them.  
This plan presents an overarching strategic framework to accelerate science that will result in 
improvements in quality of life for all people with neurological disorders, and ultimately to prevent or 
cure these diseases.  Planning at NINDS did not start and will not end with this Strategic Plan.  This plan 
fits within the broad research goals of the Department of Health and Human Services Strategic Plan and 
the NIH Strategic Plan.  Within the NINDS Strategic Plan’s framework, several NINDS activities provide 
more detailed guidance.  Indeed, assessing the landscape of public health needs and scientific 
opportunities, listening to stakeholders, identifying priorities, evaluating what is working, and deciding 
how best to move forward are integral to the Institute’s daily activities.  When appropriate to the state 
of the science, the Institute engages the research community and the public in more formal planning for 
specific diseases and on cross-cutting issues. NINDS also participates in NIH-wide and trans-agency 
planning on

--- PAGE 5 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'goals and \nstrategies', 'vision'] ---
   
 
4 
 
pandemic.  The Institute is intensively engaged with its partners across the NIH in many aspects of 
COVID-19 research.  Looking forward, the potential long-term sequalae of infection will be a major focus 
in the coming years.  The Institute will also apply positive lessons from COVID-19 research programs to 
other diseases, including, perhaps, answering new questions by leveraging existing clinical cohorts and 
using telehealth to expand access to underserved communities. NINDS recognizes the significant impact 
the COVID-19 pandemic has had on the research enterprise and protecting early career investigators 
who are essential for future progress, but vulnerable to disruption of their research, is a high priority for 
the Institute.  NINDS also plays a leadership role in the Helping to End Addiction Long termSM (HEAL) 
Initiative to advance non-addictive treatments for pain. Partnering with the National Institute of Aging 
and with special funding from Congress, NINDS has intensified efforts to understand and treat causes of 
dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease, cerebrovascular disease, frontotemporal degeneration, Lewy body 
dementias, and mixed  dementias.  Congress also enabled the development of transformative new 
research tools with the Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) 
Initiative® through the 21st Century Cures Act to map, monitor and modulate brain circuits.   The 
Institute’s emphasis on foundational basic research, readily adaptable preclinical and clinical applied 
research programs, and sustaining a vigorous research workforce are among the overarching strategies 
that prepare NINDS for unexpected challenges and opportunities.  NINDS is now poised to leverage 
powerful new genetic technologies, advances in data science and artificial intelligence (AI), and 
innovative research, diagnostic, and therapy device technologies that were all beyond the horizon 
during the previous strategic planning. 
This NINDS Strategic Plan describes how the Institute will take on the currently manifest and yet 
unforeseen challenges of neurological disorders.  The Institute’s guiding vision is a world that is free 
from the burden of neurological disorders.  Although the need is great, and the challenges daunting, we 
firmly believe real progress will most assuredly come from the dedicated scientists that NINDS funds.  
NINDS’s role is to optimize the taxpayers’ investment in neuroscience to maximize the impact and 
accelerate the pace of discovery.   
To watch how this future unfolds, I invite you to monitor our website at https://www.ninds.nih.gov/. We 
will update this website as the Institute takes specific actions to implement the broad goals and 
strategies described in this plan.    
Walter J. Koroshetz, M.D. 
Director, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 
 
Nina Schor, M.D., Ph.D. 
Deputy Director, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 
 
  

--- PAGE 6 matched=['mission'] ---
   
 
5 
 
THE BURDEN OF NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS 
By some calculations of premature death, disability, and suffering, neurological disorders account for a 
greater burden than any other group of diseases (Nature Neurology 15:371-2, 2019). These diseases 
affect people of all ages—infants and children, young adults, and the elderly—and include some of the 
most common of all afflictions. For example: 
• More than 25 million Americans have chronic pain every day and nearly 8 million people have pain 
so severe that it interferes with life activities.   
• Almost 800,000 Americans have a stroke each year, 140,000 die, and stroke is the leading cause of 
serious, long-term disability in the United States.   
• Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) is the leading cause of death and disability in children and young adults. 
At least 5 million TBI survivors need long-term help for activities of daily living.   
• 3.4 million people in the United States have epilepsy, 1 million are drug resistant, and 1 in 26 people 
will develop epilepsy in their lifetime.  
• About 5 million people in the U.S. now have dementia; with the aging population this may reach 14 
million by 2060.  
• Migraine headache is the most common cause of missed work, affects 10% of all people and is three 
times more common in women.  
• Essential tremor, Parkinson’s disease, dystonia, multiple sclerosis, autism, brain tumors, spinal cord 
injury, cerebral palsy, hydrocephalus, spina bifida, peripheral neuropathy, and other common 
neurological disorders affect millions more.  
 
Collectively rare disorders also take an enormous toll.  According to the NIH Office of Rare Diseases, of 
7,000 rare disorders overall, about 40 percent are neurological disorders and 90 percent of rare 
childhood disorders have major neurological effects. 
About NINDS 
The mission of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) is to seek 
fundamental knowledge about the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the 
burden of neurological disease.  NINDS supports research that advances the diagnosis, prevention, and 
treatment of neurological disorders, that is, diseases of the brain, spinal cord, nerves, and 
neuromuscular system.  Basic research to understand the nervous system in health and disease, which 
provides the foundation for public and private sector progress, is at the core of this mission. 
NINDS is one of 27 Institutes and Centers that make up the National Institutes of Health (NIH).  The 
Institute has been a leader in the world of neuroscience for 70 years.  Although the name of the Institute 
and the scope of its responsibilities have changed over time [see NINDS Legislative History box below], 
NINDS has maintained its fundamental principles and core strategies since its inception.   
The Institute’s Extramural Research Program supports research at universities, medical centers, research 
institutions, and small businesses throughout the United States.  The Extramural Research Program 
strongly emphasizes investigator-initiated research with rigorous peer review because of its long track 
record of driving progress.  Augmenting investigator-initiated research, the Institute solicits research 
targeted to unmet public health needs, extraordinary scientific opportunities, and provision of resources 
that catalyze progress. 

--- PAGE 7 matched=['mission'] ---
   
 
6 
 
In fiscal year 2019, the NINDS budget of $2.274 billion supported 3,735 research grants and 657 
research training grants across the United States.  Research Project Grants, primarily investigator 
initiated, make up approximately 72 percent of the budget. 
The NINDS Intramural Research Program at the NIH campus in Bethesda, Maryland, has unique 
capabilities that complement extramural research.  These include the John Edward Porter Neuroscience 
Research Center, which integrates the extensive NIH neuroscience research community across 
Institutes, and the NIH Clinical Center, the largest hospital entirely dedicated to research in the world.  
The Intramural Research Program is about 9 percent of the budget, supporting 47 principal 
investigators.   
Throughout its history, in both extramural and intramural research, NINDS has emphasized basic 
research, while also supporting a full spectrum of innovative laboratory and clinical research to advance 
diagnosis, therapy, and prevention of neurological conditions.  Support for training of graduate students 
and post-doctoral researchers and for early stage investigators has been, and continues to be, a long-
standing priority for NINDS.   
NINDS collaborates with all parts of the NIH.  In addition to many joint activities with individual Institutes 
and Centers, NINDS is a leader in both 1) the NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience, which is a collaborative 
framework that includes the NIH Office of the Director and 14  Institutes and Centers that support 
research on the nervous system and 2) the Undiagnosed Diseases Network, a program supported by 17 
Institutes and Centers that combines basic and clinical research to advance research and help patients 
with undiagnosed diseases.  In recent years, NINDS has taken on leadership for large-scale trans-NIH 
Initiatives to which Congress has directed funding.  These include the Brain Research through Advancing 
Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) Initiative®, the Helping to End Addiction Long-termSM (HEAL) 
Initiative, and Alzheimer’s Disease and Alzheimer’s Disease Related Dementias (AD/ADRD) research.  
Beyond NIH, NINDS collaborates extensively with many other federal agencies, including the 
Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the National Science Foundation.  Similarly, NINDS interacts 
with the private sector via, for example, small business research (SBIR/STTR) programs, the Accelerating 
Medicines Partnership (AMP) for Parkinson’s disease, the NIH HEALSM Initiative, the Epilepsy Therapy 
Screening Program, and various clinical trials activities.  These interactions are instrumental in advancing 
the NINDS mission. 
NINDS Legislative History 
Congress, with the signature of President Harry S. Truman, established the Institute in 1950 as the 
National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Blindness (NINDB) through Public Law 81-692.  In 1968, 
PL 90-489 renamed the Institute as the National Institute of Neurological Diseases, and the blindness 
program became the nucleus of NIH’s newly established National Eye Institute.  PL 90-636 then changed 
the name to the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke.  In 1975, NINDS was renamed as 
the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke (NINCDS), reflecting the 
addition of a new program in communicative disorders.  When the communicativ

--- PAGE 8 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
   
 
7 
 
 
 
Science: Support and perform rigorous and important neuroscience 
research. 
To lay the foundation for progress against the multitude of neurological disorders, the Institute seeks to 
understand how the healthy brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves, and neuromuscular system develop 
and carry out their functions, what goes wrong in disease, and why some people recover successfully 
but others do not. To reap the benefits from this basic research, the Institute must advance the 
diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of neurological disorders, both directly through NINDS-supported 
research and indirectly by catalyzing private sector research and development.  This broad spectrum of 
research is essential to improve our capability to prevent neurological disorders or to precisely provide 
the right care at the right time for each person. The following describes why each of these goals is vital 
to the Institute’s mission and how NINDS will support research toward these scientific goals. 
Understanding the Brain, Spinal Cord, Peripheral Nerves, and Neuromuscular System 
Understand the basis of nervous system function, from the perspective of molecules, cells, 
circuits, and whole organ systems. 
Understanding the healthy nervous system is the foundation for public and private sector progress in 
preventing and treating all neurological disorders and for maximizing brain health.  Although the 
potential long-term benefit of this basic research for people with neurological conditions is a strong 
motivation for researchers, scientists’ natural curiosity about how the brain works and their insights into 
which questions may hold the key to fundamental advances often drives new discoveries with benefits 
that were completely unanticipated.  A single major basic science discovery, whether from experiments 
in single cells, simple organisms, laboratory animals, or people, has the potential to elevate research for 
a host of different diseases.  Fundamental studies on how genes and the environment guide brain 
development, on chemical signals by which brain cells communicate, on mechanisms of electrical 
activity in the brain and spinal cord, on supporting cells in the nervous system, on the relationship 
between brain cells and their blood vessels (the “neurovascular unit”), on brain circuits that control 
complex behaviors, and on many other aspects of basic neuroscience underlie all of today’s and 
tomorrow’s treatments for neurological disorders.  Similarly, the NINDS mission benefits enormously 
from basic research in many areas of science from across the NIH, the National Science Foundation, and 
other organizations.  
NIH is and will continue to be the world’s leading supporter of basic neuroscience, with additional 
funding coming from disease organizations, private science foundations, and industry.  Since the last 
NINDS Strategic Plan, NINDS has established an ongoing process to monitor the vigor of basic 
neuroscience research.  The Institute has taken several actions to sustain these crucial lines of 
mechanistic, discovery research, including targeted funding for fundamental neuroscience, and 
published statements by the entire NIH leadership to the research community on the importance of 
basic research prompted by NINDS analyses.  Engaging the diverse scientific perspectives and insights of 
thousands of scientists, engineers, and physicians to seek out the best opportunities to advance our 
understanding is the mos

--- PAGE 12 matched=['strategic plan', 'Division of '] ---
   
 
11 
 
efficiency and effectiveness of clinical trials, and the Institute will take advantage of innovations, 
including adaptive trial designs and data analytics, to carry out these studies most efficiently and 
effectively.  The Institute also supports studies on the natural history of disease that will inform 
interventional trials.  The Institute’s Common Data Elements project works with research and patient 
advocacy communities to develop data standards for neurological disorders that facilitate data sharing 
in a meaningful way  and enhance data integrity.  Interoperability is crucial as potential applications of 
data analytics and artificial intelligence interrogation of clinical data become more useful.  Information 
about NINDS’s clinical research programs, including currently available tools, can be found at 
https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Current-Research/Research-Funded-NINDS/Clinical-Research.   
Preventing Neurological Disorders 
Sustain the progress in stroke prevention and extend progress in prevention for neurological 
diseases beyond stroke, building on basic research advances in epilepsy, TBI, neurodegenerative 
diseases, chronic pain, and neurodevelopmental and other neurological disorders to develop 
effective interventions. 
Progress in preventing stroke and promoting brain health has had a major impact on public health.  
However, despite reductions in stroke rates across all ethnic groups, significant stroke disparities persist 
across population groups, and stroke rates are apparently rising in younger persons after decades of 
improvement.  Furthermore, the progress in preventing stroke has been the exception; there has been 
much less progress in preventing other neurological disorders.  Basic research now underway provides 
the foundation for preventing other diseases, for example, by understanding why acute pain becomes 
chronic for some people and how brain trauma can result in epilepsy, and there are encouraging results 
from recent trials showing that progress in controlling major stroke risk factors may also slow the 
development of dementia.  There is also increasing attention to the role of the environment, including 
stress, environmental chemicals, and a variety of other factors, relating to neurological disorders.  Thus, 
both continuing the long-term progress in preventing stroke and promoting brain health and extending 
progress to other neurological disorders will remain high priorities for NINDS in the immediate future.      
Eliminating Neurological Health Disparities 
Improve Neurological Health for all people including those disproportionately and highly 
impacted by disease, guided by the recommendations of the ongoing NINDS strategic plan to 
eliminate health disparities. 
Neurological conditions affect all people across the lifespan. However, they can differentially affect 
individuals based upon various characteristics, such as demographic, geographic, socioeconomic, or 
other factors. Even more, there are many individuals and populations for which the prevalence of 
certain neurological conditions is unknown, because of underrepresentation in clinical studies.  NINDS is 
committed to understanding what drives these health differences across the lifespan and reducing the 
disproportionate burden of neurological disorders borne by highly impacted populations, including 
those designated by the NIH to experience health disparities NIH-Designated Populations with Health 
Disparities | NIMH

--- PAGE 13 matched=['strategic plan'] ---
   
 
12 
 
serves as the focal point for initiatives that address neurological health disparities on both national and 
global levels. 
Within the broader framework of the overall NINDS strategic plan, in 2020, the Institute embarked on a 
planning process focused on addressing neurological health disparities.  A Working Group of the 
National Advisory Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NANDS) Council, which included several notable 
experts in health disparities research, was charged with providing scientific guidance on how best to 
advance research on neurological health disparities and improve overall health, with an emphasis on 
addressing biologic, socio-demographic, economic, and other social determinants of health.  To further 
inform this effort, a Request for Information (RFI) gathered valuable insights from extramural 
researchers, relevant stakeholders, and the public, on known areas of disparities and inequities in 
neurological disease, treatment, and provision of services across the lifespan which yielded nearly 150 
responses.  The planning effort culminated in a public three-day virtual workshop held on September 
22-24, 2021, as well as published reports outlining the planning process, key findings, and research 
recommendations from the Working Group to the NINDS.  
Cross-cutting Strategies 
Several core strategies are important across all NINDS scientific goals, from basic studies on the nervous 
system in health and disease through development of diagnostics, treatments, and prevention.   
Rigor and Transparency 
Promote scientific rigor and transparency throughout all NINDS programs and policies 
All scientific progress requires rigorous, creative, and high-quality studies that build upon validated prior 
discoveries.  Many scientific reports, however, do not transparently describe the design, methods, or 
analysis of experiments so that others may adequately assess their quality.  Potential flaws in the 
practice of science that cannot be evaluated based on published reports undermine future research 
efforts.  To maximize the value of the taxpayers’ investment in our research, NINDS programs and 
policies must ensure that studies are conducted rigorously and reported transparently.  
NINDS has been a leader within NIH and the research community in promoting rigor and transparency.  
In 2012, a major Institute workshop convened stakeholders from academia, industry, academic 
publishing, and government toward this end.  That workshop, subsequent meetings, establishment of 
the NINDS Office of Research Quality (ORQ) and NINDS Rigor Working Group (NRWG), and several 
activities of this group have improved attention to rigor and transparency within NINDS, across the NIH, 
and in the research and publishing community.   
Most recently, NINDS surveyed current training practices and convened a workshop that brought 
together subject matter experts capable of evaluating current educational practices to discuss how best 
to impart knowledge about the fundamental principles of rigorous research.  Informed by this 
discussion, NINDS is developing a framework for advancing rigorous research that will include the 
formation of an educational platform on the principles of rigorous research as well as the establishment 
of networks of rigor champions in the research community who will contribute to the development of 
the educational platform and work together to change the culture of science to favor high quality 
research ove

--- PAGE 14 matched=['mission'] ---
   
 
13 
 
Investigator-initiated Research 
Maintain an emphasis on investigator-initiated research, balancing short- and long-term investments, 
small and large-scale efforts, and revolutionary (high risk/high reword) and evolutionary (high quality, 
more incremental) approaches   
NINDS will continue to rely primarily on investigator-initiated research to advance fundamental 
understanding of the brain, spinal cord, nerves, and neuromuscular system.  Curiosity-driven, 
investigator-initiated research is especially well suited to supporting discovery research, which engages 
investigator’s insights about how the brain works and pursues new avenues revealed by unanticipated 
findings.  There are myriad unsolved questions about the nervous system that research is unravelling at 
multiple levels of analysis, from molecules to the neural network dynamics underlying behavior of whole 
organisms, bringing to bear knowledge and methods from a wide spectrum of scientific, engineering, 
and medical disciplines.  In this rapidly evolving landscape of opportunity, engaging the diverse 
perspectives and insights of thousands of scientists, engineers, and physicians to seek out the best 
opportunities to advance our understanding has been and continues to be the most effective path 
forward.   
NINDS provides a variety of funding opportunities for investigator-initiated research with differing 
review criteria, funding levels, durations, component structures, and other characteristics designed to 
support small to large-scale research efforts, collaborations, and team science, including potentially 
“revolutionary” (high risk/high reward) research and  “evolutionary” (high quality, more incremental) 
research that is also essential for progress.  Similarly, the Institute supports both short-term, exploratory 
studies, and investigations which, by their nature, must be long-term investments.  For example, the 
Research Program Award (R35) grants can extend for eight years and support an investigator’s overall 
research program rather than a discreet set of specific aims.  Thus, the Research Program Award is 
especially suitable for innovative and long-term basic research.   
Because individual investigators have historically driven progress, especially discovery research, in 
neuroscience, NINDS policies will maintain the vigor of the neuroscience research community, ensuring 
that as many laboratories as possible can be adequately supported.   Investigators are especially 
vulnerable early in their careers, and NINDS will continue its aggressive policies (see, for example, 
funding strategies) to ensure that they have a fair chance.  Similarly, the challenges of neuroscience 
dictate that NINDS must draw its workforce from the full breadth of the nation’s talent pool, as 
discussed in the training sections of this plan.  
To support the development of biomarkers, preclinical development of therapies, and large clinical 
studies, NINDS often relies upon targeted funding announcements with review criteria and grant 
characteristics designed to meet the special needs of more applied research and development, including 
milestone-based funding.  Although these programs rely upon solicitations, the Institute also designs 
many of these targeted funding opportunities with a similar spirit to traditional investigator-initiated 
discovery-oriented research programs by focusing not on specific disorders or approaches, but rather 
providing broad flexibilit

--- PAGE 15 matched=['mission'] ---
   
 
14 
 
Team Science 
Support innovative team science approaches for emerging research opportunities of broad scope and 
complexity 
Progress has brought an ever-increasing knowledge base and armamentarium of technological 
capabilities to neuroscience.  With this has come a trend toward increasing collaboration among 
scientists.  To a large extent, researchers, as always, form temporary alliances to take on specific 
experimental challenges, and NINDS grants to individual investigators provide the flexibility to do so.  
For some types of research, such as clinical trials and drug development, team science has long been the 
norm, and NINDS has specific programs that address those needs.  Team science has been less common 
in basic neuroscience research, although there are notable exceptions, including programs currently 
underway within the BRAIN Initiative® that bring together scientists and engineers from across several 
disciplines.  NINDS is currently exploring programs to support team science that are underway across 
the NIH and beyond.  The Institute is learning from these programs and assessing whether current 
NINDS grant mechanisms are optimal to support emerging research neuroscience opportunities of 
broad scope and complexity that may require a sustained team science approach.  Beyond grant 
mechanisms, changes in the culture and reward systems of research may be necessary to fully realize 
the potential of team science to advance the NINDS mission, and the Institute will work with the 
research community toward that end.  
Neuroethics 
Identify and navigate ethical challenges and implications arising from neuroscience by supporting 
neuroethics resources for the neuroscience community and fostering research and training in neuroethics 
Advances in science can present ethical challenges.  Existing ethical frameworks may require 
interpretation in new contexts as science moves forward.  For neuroscience, this can be especially 
trenchant because of the brain’s centrality to fundamental aspects of ourselves.  As a specialization of 
bioethics that focuses on neuroscience, neuroethics can partner with neuroscience to scan the horizon 
for ethical challenges, identify and explore the underlying values and assumptions of diverse 
stakeholders, and assist in mitigating potential ethical concerns.  Thus, neuroethics can empower 
neuroscience research and inform the design, conduct, interpretation, and application of research.  
The BRAIN Initiative® has a robust neuroethics component that includes a neuroethics research portfolio 
and an NIH-external Neuroethics Working Group that serve to provide BRAIN with input relating to 
neuroethics.  Building on this exemplar, NINDS has established a new NINDS Neuroethics Program that 
will work with NIH staff and stakeholders to identify and navigate ethical challenges and implications of 
neuroscience research programs and discoveries, and to facilitate neuroscience progress.  
Patient Engagement  
Increase patient engagement in all appropriate aspects of NINDS research to better address the priorities 
of patients and their families and to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of research 
NINDS will engage people with neurological conditions and their families in setting priorities, planning, 
and conducting research.  The priorities of individuals living with neurological conditions and their 
families may not always be apparent to those not experiencing the problems that a d

--- PAGE 16 matched=['mission'] ---
   
 
15 
 
effectiveness of research, not only in recruiting for clinical studies, but also in many other aspects of 
studies involving human participants, including reducing barriers to participation.   
NINDS has some important activities in place to support engagement, as discussed in the 
Communications section of this plan.  Notably, the annual Nonprofit Forum is planned by a rotating 
Executive Committee that includes numerous patient advocacy groups.  In 2020, the NIH HEALSM 
Initiative virtual workshop, “Engaging Patients in the Research Process,” explored the benefits for 
research of engaging people with neurological conditions in the planning and oversight of clinical 
research and patient recruitment for pain research, considering successful examples from other areas of 
medical research that are relevant across many areas of NINDS research.  NINDS is committed to 
increasing patient engagement in all appropriate aspects of clinical research across all areas of the 
Institute’s mission.   
Technology Access 
Ensure that the researchers throughout the scientific community can exploit emerging technologies, 
resources, and knowledge, including those emerging from the BRAIN Initiative® 
New technological research capabilities are emerging from NIH investments, most notably the BRAIN 
Initiative®.   Among these, for example, are advanced microscopy methods, automated behavioral 
analysis tools, and large scale “-omics” analyses that can potentially be applied to many research 
questions but require substantial resources.  To maximize the effectiveness of all NINDS research, the 
Institute must ensure that these capabilities are widely available.  Furthermore, a growing proportion of 
the NINDS budget is directed to special programs including the BRAIN Initiative®, the NIH HEAL Initiative, 
and AD/ADRD research.  NINDS will coordinate management of these investments to maximize impact 
and efficiency.  
NINDS also will continue to provide scientific resources that enhance the capabilities of investigators to 
carry out high quality research, while minimizing unnecessary duplication of efforts and taking 
advantage of economies of scale.  Current NINDS resources, for example, provide access to genetically 
modified mice, human post-mortem brain tissue and related biospecimens, genetic samples and cell 
lines, and validated monoclonal antibody reagents.  As the scientific and technological landscape 
changes, the Institute must continually assess what resources are best provided centrally and which are 
more appropriately focused on individual laboratories or institutions.  
Models for Neuroscience Research 
Maintain support for the full spectrum of neuroscience research models 
Looking back at the paths of discovery that led to successful therapies for neurological disorders reveals 
that a wide variety of experimental models were essential in their research and development.  Humans 
and simpler organisms share many fundamental aspects of biology.  Simpler organisms provide 
extraordinary opportunities for scientific investigations.  For example, studies in the fruit fly, Drosophila 
melanogaster, revealed fundamental principles of genetics, and the worm C. elegans helps scientists 
understand neuronal development because it has only 302 nerve cells, which have been completely 
mapped, compared to the 80 billion nerve cells in the human brain.  Similarly, genetic engineering has 
enabled scientists to study basic capabilities lik

--- PAGE 17 matched=['Strategic \nPlan', 'mission'] ---
   
 
16 
 
may reduce the necessity for using animal models and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of 
research.  This includes, for example, research on cells and organoids derived from human induced 
pluripotent stem cells, computer modeling, and an array of technologies, including advanced imaging 
techniques, that can noninvasively study the structure, function, and biochemistry of the human brain.  
Data Sharing and Data Science 
Develop and implement policies, infrastructure, and resources to take advantage of data science and 
foster sharing of high value data among the research community 
The NIH policy on data sharing notes that sharing scientific data helps validate research results, enables 
researchers to combine data types to strengthen analyses, facilitates reuse of hard-to-generate data or 
data from limited sources, and accelerates ideas for future research inquiries.  Data science is 
increasingly important across the full spectrum of studies from basic research, in which new 
technologies are rapidly generating valuable data, though clinical research, in which tools and 
centralized databases facilitate team clinical science across institutions and investigators.  As NIH 
implements this policy, which requires all NIH-funded research to include data management and sharing 
plans, the amount, emphasis, complexity, and cost of creating, curating, harmonizing, storing, accessing, 
and reusing neuroscience data will grow substantially in the next 5-10 years.  As data from emerging 
technologies grows in scale and more powerful analysis tools emerge, issues for the research 
community more broadly will have a major impact on the effectiveness of NINDS.  Among these, for 
example, are ensuring appropriate rewards and credit for creating and sharing data; determining how 
best to take advantage of burgeoning progress in the related areas of artificial intelligence and machine 
learning, which Institute investigators are rapidly applying across many areas of basic and applied 
research; defining appropriate policies to preserve data privacy; and fostering a neuroscience workforce 
trained in cutting-edge data practices.   
NINDS is currently developing an NINDS Data Science Plan, which will be aligned with the NIH Strategic 
Plan for Data Science and guide the Institute in developing data sharing principles, policies, 
infrastructure, and resources to maximize the opportunities and cost effectiveness of its research 
investments.   
Collaboration and Partnership 
Fostering productive collaborations and partnerships in their many forms is a major strategic priority 
across all scientific goals, both with respect to NINDS programs and for research projects themselves 
Collaborations and partnerships of many kinds are essential for advancing the NINDS mission and are 
becoming ever more crucial as science advances and reveals intersections between the interests of 
NINDS and other organizations, and among researchers with different areas of expertise.  Integration 
among NINDS extramural programs is essential to ensure the seamless flow of insights among basic, 
preclinical, and clinical research.  The Intramural Research Program provides an environment for 
collaborations across Institute, disciplinary, and basic/clinical boundaries that have historically been a 
strength of the program.  The NIH Blueprint for Neuroscience Research provides a framework for 
collaboration and coordination among the many parts of the NIH wh

--- PAGE 18 matched=['mission'] ---
   
 
17 
 
are paving the way for more productive interactions with industry, non-governmental organizations, 
agencies, and the broader medical community with which NINDS has less frequently collaborated.   
NINDS Intramural Research Program 
Exploit the NINDS Intramural Research Program’s unique capabilities to advance the NINDS mission 
Because it is not tethered to extramural grant review cycles, the NINDS Intramural Research Program 
(IRP) is in a unique position to capitalize on both long-term and high risk/high reward science that is 
more difficult for the extramural community to undertake. NINDS IRP Investigators are held to the 
highest standards through the Board of Scientific Counselors review process, which requires that each 
investigator be evaluated by independent experts every four (?) years. Additionally, the flexibility of the 
intramural funding structure allows the NINDS IRP to rapidly respond during public health emergencies.  
To fully realize its potential, the NINDS IRP is engaged in a detailed planning process to identify areas of 
science and scientific resources that should be augmented within the NINDS IRP; enhance clinical care 
within NINDS; increase collaboration across the basic to clinical spectrum, and with other Institutes and 
extramural researchers; and ensure that evaluations of faculty, staff, and trainees reward high-quality, 
innovative research and excellence in training and mentoring.    
Training and Workforce Development : Fund and conduct neuroscience 
research training and career development programs to ensure a vibrant 
and talented, neuroscience workforce. 
Today’s research trainees are an integral part of the neuroscience research workforce, and they will 
become tomorrow’s leaders in neuroscience discovery and innovation.  Excellent mentorship and 
training are critical to the development of exceptional future scientists and are therefore critical to the 
NINDS mission.  NINDS supports neuroscience research training and career development through 
individual, institutional, and national awards, and the NINDS Intramural Research Program provides 
opportunities for research training on the NIH campus in Bethesda, Maryland.  These extramural and 
intramural programs span basic, translational, and clinical neuroscience research training initiatives at 
multiple career stages, from summer experiences for high school and undergraduate students to 
mentored career development awards for new research faculty.  Rigorous research training, strong 
mentorship, and ample opportunities for professional development provide trainees with a foundation 
for pursuing a wide range of careers in academic or industry research as well as teaching, science policy, 
science writing, and research administration, among others.   
  NINDS intends that all trainees in the NINDS intramural research program or those supported with 
extramural NINDS funds, whether through specific NINDS training and career development programs or 
research project grants, receive excellent scientific training, professional development, and mentorship.  
NINDS can directly influence training quality in the intramural research program and in extramural 
programs designated for research training and career development, yet many more trainees are 
supported through extramural funding for research projects, where this influence is less direct.  
However, institutions and investigators receiving support through training mechanisms overla

--- PAGE 19 matched=['research areas'] ---
   
 
18 
 
pace with increasing complexity in neuroscience research and to address current and emerging 
challenges and opportunities.  
Scientific Training 
Support training across the breadth of basic, translational, and clinical neuroscience research to 
foster advances and innovation. 
NINDS supports and provides training across the spectrum from fundamental basic science to 
translational and clinical research.  NINDS must continue to align programs and policies to unique and 
evolving training needs and career trajectories in these areas to ensure a vibrant workforce.  For 
example, in addition to broadly available programs for individuals and institutions, NINDS supports 
training programs that are tailored to clinician scientists at different career stages, that provide training 
specifically for translational research, and that support postdoctoral fellows using cutting-edge tools, 
theories, or approaches in one of the seven, high-priority research areas of the NIH BRAIN Initiative.   
Scientific advances often occur when investigators recognize the relevance of discoveries made in an 
entirely different discipline.  Moreover, investigators will often be best positioned to make important 
discoveries when they understand the uses of a wide array of methods and technologies.  Therefore, 
training in neuroscience research must extend beyond proficiency in an individual line of study so that 
investigators are prepared take on new directions, adopt and develop new approaches, and work 
collaboratively and in teams to share expertise and resources.  Consequently, NINDS will continue to 
empower the research community to direct training to areas of need and opportunity as well as 
incentivize and support broad, cross-disciplinary training in both content and technology that will seed 
innovation, collaboration, and novel discoveries.  NINDS also will implement strategies for training in 
data science, neuroethics, , and other cross-cutting or emerging approaches with the potential for wide-
ranging application to neuroscience research.  Finally, NINDS will work to enhance coordination and 
awareness about programs and policies for research training. 
Strengthen training in principles of rigorous research, experimental design, and quantitative 
skills. 
Rigor in scientific research, sound experimental design, and quantitative analytical methods are 
essential to continued progress in neuroscience.  NINDS has championed efforts to promote rigor in the 
biomedical research community and recognizes that research training programs can be an effective way 
to improve the rigor of scientific research conducted by trainees as well as established investigators who 
serve as training mentors.  For example, NINDS has incorporated requirements in extramural 
institutional training programs for intensive, formal training in experimental design, statistical 
methodology, and quantitative literacy and also provides funding to these programs to integrate a 
statistician into programmatic activities and to fund workshops on quantitative analysis.  However, 
opportunities remain for strengthening these efforts across neuroscience research training within both 
the NINDS extramural and intramural communities.  NINDS will enhance the effectiveness of training in 
principles of rigorous research, experimental design, and quantitative skills by expanding emphasis in 
review, evaluation, and interactions with the research community.  In addition, NINDS 

--- PAGE 21 matched=['mission'] ---
   
 
20 
 
participation in such activities can vary across institutions, programs, and lab or research groups, and 
opportunities for ongoing professional development may be limited outside of traditional training 
trajectories.  NINDS will promote professional development across career stages for the neuroscience 
workforce through support for learning and experiences that are important for research but likewise 
applicable to other career choices.  In addition, NINDS will emphasize the essential roles of personal 
wellness and positive community in professional success, including institutional commitments to family-
friendly environments, accommodations, and leave policies that help trainees achieve their career goals 
despite critical life events.  NINDS will also partner with other NIH Institutes, Centers, and Offices, as 
well as professional societies, universities, nonprofit organizations, and others with shared goals in 
professional development for the biomedical research workforce. 
Communications: Promote dynamic communication and 
broadstakeholder engagement to accelerate scientific progress and 
reduce the burden of neurological disorders.   
NINDS must promote dynamic communication and broad stakeholder engagement to accelerate 
scientific progress and reduce the burden of neurological disorders.  Achieving NINDS’s mission requires 
dynamic and sustained communication efforts about what the Institute does, why it does it, and how 
the work and its products can benefit the health and well-being of all people.  Several principles help 
guide NINDS’s communication and dissemination efforts: 
• Science has no impact until clearly communicated. 
• Communication is a powerful tool for transparency and accountability. 
• Communication must be bi-directional, with emphasis on engagement and partnerships.  
• NINDS strives for fairness in access to the Institute and to scientific and policy information. 
• NINDS endeavors to be a trusted, go-to source of credible, timely information on neurological 
disorders. 
• NINDS strives to rapidly disseminate scientific discovery and innovation to all stakeholders.  
 
NINDS’s Stakeholders 
NINDS’s audiences are the Institute’s stakeholders — those individuals and organizations who influence 
us and are affected by what we do.  These include, but are not limited to, the national and international 
research and health practice communities, individuals with neurological conditions across the lifespan 
and their caregivers, the public, Congress and policymakers, other federal agencies, public and private 
partners, and the media.  NINDS seeks to develop and refine communication strategies tailored to the 
varied needs of all our stakeholders.  
 
Reach and Impact 
Expand the reach and impact of NINDS’s communication efforts. 
To be a trusted, go-to source on neurological research and disorders, NINDS must continually engage 
with its many stakeholders to identify and respond to their information needs.  This stakeholder 
engagement requires bi-directional communication and careful maintenance of working relationships 
and is made ever more complex by the large quantity and variety of stakeholders.  This goal explores 
strategies to broaden NINDS’s outreach efforts, including fostering opportunities for communication 
partnerships that enhance and support the NINDS mission. 

--- PAGE 22 matched=['scientific \npriorit', 'mission'] ---
   
 
21 
 
Expanding stakeholder interactions and better understand all stakeholders’ needs  
NINDS regularly engages with different stakeholders and strives to better understand their needs.  
Despite several successes, there are opportunities to build upon these efforts.  Expanding who we 
engage with to reach organizations and individuals we may be missing is an especially high priority.  
NINDS will continue to plan and conduct ongoing outreach activities tailored to the needs of different 
stakeholders, while exploring new venues and mechanisms to enhance the breadth of input.  
Amplify messaging through traditional and emerging communication platforms and enhanced 
partnerships  
NINDS uses a wide variety of communication tools and platforms, including websites, traditional media 
(e.g., press releases and science news articles), social media, digital and multimedia (e.g., podcasts, 
videos, and mobile apps), conference exhibits, public talks, and print brochures and publications, among 
others.  Still, there are several opportunities to enhance the way NINDS content is presented, packaged, 
and distributed, as well as to explore emerging communication technologies and platforms that might 
help broaden our reach.  One of the most efficient ways of expanding NINDS’s reach is to cultivate 
communication partnerships, leveraging the extensive social networks of our many stakeholders.  To 
this end, NINDS collaborates with many professional societies, nonprofit organizations, and other 
federal agencies on various communication and engagement efforts.  Opportunities exist, however, to 
strengthen and expand such partnerships.  
Systematically assess and evaluate communication efforts to refine and adopt the most effective 
approaches  
NINDS uses web analytics and other tracking efforts to assess some aspects of our communication 
efforts; however, a more robust analytics approach and larger suite of metrics are needed to fully 
measure effectiveness.  NINDS also appreciates the value of applying a more systematic approach to our 
assessment efforts, including identifying the goals and appropriate analytical methods prior to each 
communication and engagement effort.  Having robust analytics is key to identifying knowledge and 
resource gaps and spurring new content strategies to improve engagement.  
Timeliness, Clarity, and Transparency 
Communicate how the Institute operates and makes decisions in a timely, clear, and transparent 
manner. 
An important goal for NINDS is to provide information about our activities and decision making to 
individuals and organizations who are interested in and affected by what we do.  By promoting 
understanding of our operations and strategies, we can work better with the research community writ 
large.   
Engage a broad range of stakeholder communities on NINDS’s priorities and widely communicate funding 
opportunities  
Fulfilling the NINDS mission depends on accurate, timely, clear, , and broad communication of scientific 
priorities and funding opportunities.  NINDS routinely seeks input on research gaps and opportunities, 
most intensively through the National Advisory Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NANDS) Council, 
frequent topical workshops, and strategic planning efforts where insights and advice are provided by 
researchers, other subject matter experts, and the public.  More can be done, however, to optimize the 
way the Institute gathers and incorporates this critical input in a sys

--- PAGE 24 matched=['strategic plan', 'mission'] ---
   
 
23 
 
disseminate than research articles.  The exchange of these resources among researchers and health 
practitioners, however, is crucial to supporting a steady pace of progress and translation of knowledge 
into care.  
Increase the public’s understanding of neuroscience through educational engagement and provide 
trustworthy information on neuroscience, neurological disorders, and stroke  
NINDS employs several initiatives to communicate health information that caregivers and those with 
neurological conditions need, as well as to educate the public on neuroscience research and the 
importance of brain health.  For example, NINDS provides public health information for more than 250 
neurological disorders and develops science education materials such as Brain Basics, interactive 
educational games, and printed materials on public health and other NINDS-related content.  We will 
continue to expand these consumer resources, public health campaigns, and educational efforts aimed 
at fostering interest in neuroscience and knowledge of neurobiology across all ages.  
Promote stakeholders’ understanding of the mission and value of NIH and NINDS 
NINDS must be able to clearly show how our research investments on behalf of American taxpayers 
have yielded (and will continue to yield) tangible health benefits, both domestically and globally.  This is 
especially complicated by the fact that NINDS cannot realize its  full value without the extensive work of 
others; for example, other NIH Institutes, other federal agencies, other research funders, policymakers, 
pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, the nonprofit sector, regulators, health practitioners, and 
a receptive public.  NINDS regularly highlights research advances and their implications for health in 
several ways, including through press releases, the NINDS website, and the Director’s Twitter feed and 
other social media accounts.  We seek to build on and enhance these efforts and develop even more 
compelling ways to communicate what we do, and how we interface with other integral components of 
the biomedical enterprise to accomplish the NINDS mission.   
Workforce Culture: Create and sustain a supportive work culture for the 
NINDS workforce that becomes the model for biomedical research and 
the neuroscience community. 
The effectiveness of the NINDS staff is crucial to the Institute’s success in advancing its mission.  For this 
reason, attention to the Institute’s workforce culture and its impact on staff performance is an integral 
part of the NINDS strategic plan.  The following goals address these issues:  
Performance Management 
Establish effective performance management, with clear procedures, fair policies, meaningful 
recognition, accountability, and transparency. 
To ensure the effectiveness of the NINDS staff and the organization, NINDS must pay attention first and 
foremost to how the work at NINDS and the entire organization are managed.  Sound performance 
management, which can be achieved by clear organizational structure and procedures, fair policies, 
meaningful recognition, accountability, and transparency, sets a strong foundation upon which good 
morale and productivity can be built.  NINDS believes that enhancing employee engagement through 
effective performance management will increase our commitment to and advancement of the NINDS 
mission of reducing the burden of neurological disease.  NINDS will continue evaluation of its current 
organi

--- PAGE 25 matched=['mission'] ---
   
 
24 
 
recognition.  Our goal is to create an environment in which the NINDS leaders and supervisors are able 
to lead most effectively and everyone at all levels of NINDS is empowered to contribute in ways that are 
meaningful to the organization and to the individual.   
Supportive Workforce Culture 
Promote a positive and productive work environment and workforce culture with a strong sense 
of community. 
According to an NIH-wide climate survey conducted in 2019, more than one in five NIH employees said 
they have experienced harassment in the past year.  To address this issue, NIH and NINDS initiated 
several programs focused on demonstrating accountability, creating expectations to ensure a safe 
workplace, and providing clear channels of communication.  As an Institute that funds neuroscience 
research and supports training of the next generation of neuroscientists at many academic institutions 
across the United States, NINDS will continue to look inwardly and identify and implement strategies to 
create a workplace that is free of harassment and discrimination, and will strive to be a model for the 
extramural neuroscience research community.  Some initial strategies include recurring bystander 
training required of all staff, education on anti-harassment policy and available resources, and offering 
peer assistance and frontline support for common workplace issues.  Ultimately, NINDS aims to foster 
an open work environment where everyone not only is treated in a respectful manner but also is heard 
and feels at ease when speaking up, which we hope will allow us to find more creative solutions 
together.   
Communication and Collaboration 
Promote communication and collaboration within and across NINDS communities. 
Effective internal communication is an essential tool in daily operations within NINDS and in 
accomplishing all four major goals to advance NINDS’s mission.  For effective internal communication 
within NINDS, clear lines of communication must be established at different levels and parts of the 
organization, and relevant information should be shared with appropriate personnel in a timely manner.  
Silos within the organization should be identified and broken down to stimulate opportunities for 
enhanced collaboration and peer support.  Strategies include developing, refining, and disseminating an 
internal communication strategy, creating opportunities to bring people together and quickly assemble 
high-quality teams, and incentivizing collaboration across NINDS.  By better facilitating the way NINDS 
staff members work with one another, we hope to nurture a strong sense of community and work more 
nimbly. 
Employee Work-Life Satisfaction 
Foster a workforce culture that recognizes work-life needs and supports career goals and 
satisfaction. 
To attract and maintain high caliber talent at NINDS, it is important to foster a workforce culture that 
not only challenges individuals to grow professionally but also understands that high quality products 
come from people who are satisfied at work and in life.  It is our belief that this investment in the well-
being and growth of each person who works at NINDS will lead to accelerated scientific progress and 
reducing the impact of neurological disorders.  Employee growth and work-life satisfaction can be 
promoted through a wider availability of opportunities for career development, training, and mentoring, 
and enhanced support for work-life balance, including c

--- PAGE 26 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'mission'] ---
   
 
25 
 
Stewardship 
Congress has charged NINDS with responsibilities that are vital for advancing public health and 
entrusted the Institute with substantial authorities and resources to accomplish this mission.  Effective 
and efficient stewardship of this public trust is integral to all NINDS policies and programs.  Attention to 
stewardship across all programs, together with thoughtful priority setting, planning, evaluation, and 
continuous data-driven improvement, enable the Institute to be an effective steward. 
Programs and Policies in Service of Good Stewardship  
Good stewardship is inherent in the design and execution of all NINDS programs, policies, and 
practices presented in this Strategic Plan. 
Good stewardship is not a separate obligation but rather is inherent in the design and execution of all 
NINDS programs, policies, and practices presented in this Strategic Plan and in the Institute’s core 
strategies.  NINDS relies upon peer review of all research proposals to ensure scientific quality.  
Extensive NINDS collaborations leverage the Institute’s investments to maximize their benefit.  The 
Institute’s leadership on enhancing rigor and transparency of research minimizes the waste of time and 
resources on following up on erroneous prior research.  NINDS’ emphasis on data sharing maximizes the 
impact of research findings and reduces unnecessary duplication.  The Institute actively manages large 
projects, with interim analyses of large clinical trials, monitoring of milestones in large clinical studies 
and preclinical therapy development projects, and, when appropriate, shifting funds to the best current 
opportunities.  NINDS provides research resources and reagents that take advantage of economies of 
scale, empower small laboratories, and make best use of human brain tissue and genetic samples.  
Because a robust and talented pool of dedicated researchers is the most essential factor in driving 
progress, NINDS training programs recruit and develop the best scientists and physicians from the full 
breadth of the nation’s talent pool.  Attention to the Institute’s internal workforce culture is an integral 
part of this plan because the scientific and management staff are the front line in ensuring good 
stewardship throughout NINDS programs.  Similarly, communication and dissemination are essential to 
the Institute’s mission, for example by providing transparency to the public on NINDS-supported 
research and engaging stakeholders to help inform the Institute’s priority setting.   
Planning and Priority Setting 
In setting priorities, NINDS weighs public health needs, scientific opportunities, and the 
Institute’s unique responsibilities and capabilities in the overall research ecosystem. 
The number of outstanding research questions about neurological disorders multiplied by the scientific 
opportunities for answering them generates far more possibilities for research than NINDS can pursue, 
as evident in the large numbers of high-quality research proposals received each year.  In setting 
priorities, NINDS not only weighs public health needs and scientific opportunities but also considers the 
role the Institute plays in the broader research ecosystem by virtue of the Institute’s unique 
responsibilities and capabilities.   
As highlighted in the Message from the Directors, to inform priority setting NINDS engages the public, 
disease advocates, research community, clinical practitioners, and the NANDS Coun

--- PAGE 27 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'goals and objectives', 'mission'] ---
   
 
26 
 
plans, trans-NIH plans, and scientific workshops on a variety of diseases and topics, all of which engage 
multiple stakeholders.   
Evaluation, Analysis, Metrics, and Continuous Improvement 
NINDS will evaluate every new and existing program and policy in a timely manner, and act on 
the findings. 
NINDS monitors the evolution of the scientific landscape to determine whether programs continue to be 
appropriate and evaluates the effectiveness of programs to improve or replace them as warranted.  
NINDS will ensure that every existing program and policy is evaluated in a timely manner, that each new 
NINDS policy or program clearly states goals and an evaluation plan at its inception, and that the 
Institute continuously improves or replaces programs based on the findings.  In response to advice of 
the previous NINDS Strategic Plan, the Institute created an internal Analysis Working Group (AWG) with 
membership from across the extramural divisions and the offices of the Institute Director.  The AWG 
leads many analyses and evaluations.  The Institute routinely discusses results from these analyses and 
evaluations with the NANDS Council. 
Adapting a principle from biomarkers development, NINDS employs metrics and non-quantitative 
indicators that are “fit for purpose,” that is, designed for the program or policy in question.  Depending 
on the nature of the program, the Institute may monitor various combinations of short, intermediate, 
and long-term outcomes—for example, a short-term check may look at whether an initiative attracts a 
wide range of proposals that peer review rates as outstanding or an encouraging number of applications 
from investigators new to a field.  Intermediate monitoring may focus, for example, on what 
publications emerge, whether clinical trials are efficiently conducted, or the extent to which intended 
research resources are created.  In the long term, an evaluation looks directly at whether the goal of the 
initiative is accomplished, e.g. is a causative gene, biomarker, or therapy developed; is a resource used 
for valuable research; do trainees succeed; does a clinical trial network improve efficiency and 
effectiveness of trials; or have stroke rates decreased as intended.   
Basic research makes up the largest part of the NINDS research portfolio and presents the greatest 
challenge to evaluation.  Several studies have confirmed the importance of basic research for medical 
progress, but also consistently shown that the value of basic research often does not become apparent 
for decades after the research is published and cannot be meaningfully evaluated relying on quantitative 
measures such as bibliometrics (measures based on number of publication and citations).  For these 
reasons, NINDS evaluations of basic research focus on qualitative evaluation of scientific content, 
including peer review for continuing support.  The large number of prestigious research awards to 
NINDS investigators provides some assurance that NINDS supports high quality innovative research.  
These awards include numerous Nobel, Lasker, MacArthur, Breakthrough, and other honors.  The 
Institute also performs thorough retrospective reviews of major advances in treatment of neurological 
disorders, which trace key contributions from NINDS research.      
The Strategic Planning Process 
NINDS launched the current strategic planning process in early 2019.  Through this process, the Institute 
aimed to identify prio

--- PAGE 28 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'goals and strategies', 'mission'] ---
   
 
27 
 
process allows NINDS to 1) identify and reinforce practices, policies, activities, and actions that advance 
our mission, and 2) identify practical ways to improve and innovate in order to better serve the research 
community and the public.  
To begin, the NINDS leadership formulated overarching goals focused on four broad topics:  
1. Science: Support and perform rigorous and important neuroscience research. 
2. Training: Fund and conduct neuroscience research training and career development programs 
to ensure a vibrant, and talented neuroscience workforce. 
3. Communications: Promote dynamic communication and broad stakeholder engagement to 
accelerate scientific progress and reduce the burden of neurological disorders. 
4. Workforce Culture: Create and sustain a supportive work culture for the NINDS workforce that 
becomes the model for biomedical research and the neuroscience community. 
The Institute charged Task Forces (see Appendix) made up of staff from across NINDS and NIH to focus 
on each of these goals.  Over a period of several months, each Task Force performed a thorough 
assessment of the current NINDS landscape and the existing practices and policies to help inform the 
goals and strategies discussed in this plan. 
NINDS also sought input from a wide variety of stakeholders at several points throughout the planning 
process.  In July 2019, NINDS published a Request for Information (RFI) to gather public input regarding 
the four broad strategic goals. NINDS received 95 responses from a range of groups, including principal 
investigators, researchers, trainees, patients, patient advocates, professional societies, nonprofit 
organizations, health care providers, other research institutions, science administrators, and members 
of the public.  In addition, there were multiple discussions with the National Advisory Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke Council and the deputy director, Dr. Nina Schor, presented the plan at various 
meetings, including the annual NINDS Nonprofit Forum and with professional societies, to gather 
additional input.  Further, NINDS held a series of six external discussion panels of individuals offering 
their insights on basic research, therapy development, training, career development, and 
communication strategies. A draft of the NINDS Strategic Plan was published for public comments from 
February 15, 2021 to April 15, 2021.  
