# NLM (2017-2027) — file: NLM_Strategic_Plan_2017-2027.pdf
# 27 pages matched priority-heading patterns


--- PAGE 1 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
A Platform for Biomedical 
Discovery and  
Data-Powered Health
Strategic Plan 2017–2027


--- PAGE 4 matched=['strategic plan'] ---
National Library of Medicine Cataloging-in-Publication D ata
Names: National Library of Medicine (U.S.). Board of Regents, author. 
Title: A platform for biomedical discovery and data-powered health : National Library of Medicine 
strategic plan 2017-2027 / report of the NLM Board of Regents.
Other titles: National Library of Medicine strategic plan 2017-202 7.
Description: [Bethesda, Md.] : U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, 
National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, 2025. | Series: NIH publication | "December 
2017." | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Subjects: MESH: Libraries, Medical. | Data Curation. | Medical Informatics Applications. 
| Biomedical Research. | Research Support as Topic. | Training Support.
Classification:  NLM Z 675.M4

--- PAGE 5 matched=['GOAL 1', 'Objective 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
Strategic Plan 2017–2027 
Contents
From the Director  ............................................................... 1
NLM Today .................................................................... 3
Executive Summary  ............................................................. 4
Strategic Plan 2017–2027  ...................................................... 5
Introduction .................................................................... 6
GOAL 1: Accelerate discovery and advance health by providing the tools 
for data-driven research. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Objective 1.1: Connect the resources of a digital research enterprise  .............. 9
Objective 1.2: Advance research and development in biomedical informatics 
and data science     ......................................... 11
Objective 1.3: Foster open science policies and practices ...................... 12
Objective 1.4:  Create a sustainable institutional, physical, 
and computational infrastructure .............................. 13
GOAL 2:  Reach more people in more ways through enhanced dissemination 
and engagement pathways ............................................ 14
Objective 2.1: Know NLM users and engage with persistence ................... 15
Objective 2.2: Foster distinctiveness of NLM as a reliable, trustable source 
of health information and biomedical data ....................... 16
Objective 2.3: Support research in biomedical and health information access 
methods and information dissemination strategies ................ 16
Objective 2.4:  Enhance information delivery  ................................. 17
GOAL 3:  Build a workforce for data-driven research and health .................... 18
Objective 3.1:  Expand and enhance research training for biomedical informatics 
and data science ........................................... 19
Objective 3.2: Assure data science and open science proficiency  ................ 20
Objective 3.3:  Engage the next generation and promote data literacy ........ . . . . .21
Appendices ...................................................................22
A. References and Notes .....................................................  2 2
B. NLM Authorizing Legislation and Executive Branch Assignments  ...................  22
C. NLM Strategic Plan Planning Process .. . . . .................................... 24
D. Working Group Participants .. . .............................................. 26


--- PAGE 6 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
1
From the Director
I am pleased to present to you the NLM Strategic Plan for the period 2017-2027. Over 750 NLM 
staff members, hundreds of national and international librarians, informatics professionals, 
biomedical scientists, data scientists, clinicians, public health specialists, and other 
stakeholders advised us as we charted a pathway towards our third century, and for this I am 
grateful.  We consider the environment around us: 
• First and foremost is the promise of data-driven discovery. Data-driven
discovery requires sophisticated library and information science to open the
door to thrilling new prospects for improving the public health, as well as
informatics and data science to deliver insights and solutions.
• Second, clinical care is rapidly migrating from hospital to home. This
migration challenges NLM to reach into these places where health occurs, not
just where care is delivered, which are less formal and less well controlled.
• Third, the spirit of open science suffuses the discovery landscape.
Governmental and scientific forces are aligning under a philosophy that
innovation is accelerated if data flow freely, that the results of government-
sponsored research should be open to the public as quickly as possible, and
that linking scientists, citizens, and industry yields social benefits.
• Fourth, the very nature of libraries is changing. Libraries continue to be
essential places for knowledge repositories and community gathering, yet
the advent of self-directed search, e-publishing and consolidation of hospital
library services challenges librarians and libraries to devise new services
and solutions.
This strategic plan positions NLM to address existing and emerging challenges in biomedical 
research and public health. We will achieve this by creating a talented workforce; building on 
our core functions of acquiring, collecting, and disseminating the world’s biomedical 
literature; and extending these skills and developing new ones to make data findable, 
accessible, interoperable, and reusable (the FAIR principles).  We will continue to lead, 
conduct, and support research in biomedical information science, informatics, and data 
science to ensure that robust terminologies provide systematic characterization of complex 
health phenomena from cells to society and to devise new methodologies that uncover the 
knowledge held in data. We will expand our training programs to incorporate data science 


--- PAGE 9 matched=['GOAL 1', 'strategic plan', 'vision'] ---
Executive Summary 
The National Library of Medicine (NLM) envisions a future in which  
data and information transform and accelerate biomedical discovery 
and improve health and health care. 
Achieving this vision will require NLM to refocus and enhance its research, development, 
training, and information services to make more biomedical data findable, accessible, 
interoperable, and reusable, to invent the tools and services to turn data and information into 
knowledge and insight, and to develop the workforce capable of doing so.  It will require new 
forms of partnership and engagement with stakeholders in the public and private sectors, 
including researchers, librarians, health professionals, entrepreneurs and innovators, and the 
public. 
This strategic plan outlines NLM’s pr
 iorities for enabling a future of biomedical discovery and 
data-powered health.  It heralds a new research paradigm in which data-driven science com-
plements experimental and observational approaches, care is characterized by high levels of 
personalization, and personally collected data become a foundation of self-knowledge and 
personal health management. 
To become a platform for biomedical discovery and data-powered health, NLM must collect 
and integrate an expanding set of information resources and enable them to be analyzed by 
tools emerging from the informatics and data science research front.  It must establish path-
ways for dissemination and engagement across a broad range of users to drive information to 
the right place at the right time.  It must expand training initiatives for informatics and data 
science research, and for technical support that will drive and shape the future of biomedical 
discovery. It must accelerate its investments in research in informatics and data science and 
align its research, development, and resource priorities toward achieving three goals, with an 
organizational structure that optimizes implementation.
GOAL 1 GOAL 2 GOAL 3
Accelerate discovery and  
advance health through  
data-driven research
1.1 Connect the resources of a  
digital research enterprise
Reach more people in more  
ways through enhanced  
dissemination and engagement
2.1 Know NLM users and engage 
with persistence
Build a workforce for data-driven 
research and health
3.1 Expand and enhance research 
training for biomedical  
informatics and data science
1.2 Advance research and  2.2 Foster distinctiveness of  
developm
ent in biomedical  
informatics and data science
1.3 Foster open science policies  
and practices
1.4 Create a sustainable  
institutional, physical, and  
computational infrastructure
NLM as a reliable, trustable-
source of health information  
and biomedical data 
2.3 Support research in  
biomedical and health  
information access methods 
and information dissemination 
strategies
3.2 Assure data science and  
open science proficiency 
3.3 Engage the next generation  
and promote data literacy
2.4 Enhanc
e information delivery
4

--- PAGE 10 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
Strategic Plan 2017–2027 

--- PAGE 11 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'vision', 'mission'] ---
6
The National Library of Medicine (NLM) is a global 
leader and trusted agent in the collection, organization 
and dissemination of biomedical information.  Tracing 
its roots to the library of the U.S. Army Surgeon 
General in 1836, its statutory mission is “…to assist 
with the advancement of medical and related sciences 
and to aid in the dissemination and exchange of 
scientific and other information important to the 
progress of medicine and to the public health.”  
NLM fulfills this mission by collecting, organizing, and providing access to the 
biomedical literature, as well as the growing volumes of molecular biology and 
clinical research data; engaging with users to discern and meet their information 
needs; advancing research and development in biomedical informatics and data 
science; and serving as the primary supporter of pre- and post-doctoral research 
training in biomedical informatics and data science in the United States. 
As one of the 27 Institutes and Centers of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
NLM supports NIH priorities and NIH’s 2016-2020 Strategic Plan objectives 
addressing biomedical research opportunities, priority-setting for innovation, 
enhancing scientific stewardship, and managing for results.  NLM will support 
the NIH mission of transforming discovery into health by providing a dynamic 
information platform that accelerates biomedical discovery and translation into 
clinical care, public health practices, and personal wellness. It will also work to 
achieve the recommendations of the NIH Advisory Committee to the Director 
that “NLM should lead efforts to support and catalyze open science” and “be the 
intellectual and programmatic epicenter for data science at NIH.” 
NLM’s vision for the coming decade is to unleash the potential of data and 
information to accelerate and transform discovery and improve health and 
Introduction

--- PAGE 12 matched=['vision'] ---
7
health care.  Central to this vision is the idea of data-powered health, in which 
holistic knowledge of the person is enriched with greater awareness of biological 
processes and human connection. With data-powered health, extant data 
complements experimental and observational approaches, care processes are 
characterized by high levels of personalization, and personal data collection 
becomes a foundation of self-knowledge and personal health management. 
Achieving this vision will require NLM to: 
1
Create and link an expanding collection of integrated and  
interoperable information resources, powered by analytic tools  
from the informatics and data science research front. This will  
require increased investments in informatics and data science and  
an organizational structure that optimizes implementation.
2
Deepen and establish new forms of engagement across a broad 
range of users to drive information to the right place at the right time.
3
Expand training initiatives for informatics and data science research 
to build a workforce to drive the future of biomedicine. 

--- PAGE 13 matched=['Goals and Objectives'] ---
GOAL ONE: 
Accelerate discovery 
and advance health by 
providing the tools for  
data-driven research
Scientific investigations  now yield not only  amazing advances but also spawn 
large and potentiall y valuable data sets that can be utilized to achieve 
significant additional  advances and even greater efficiencies to the progress of 
research. NLM will inv est in novel approac hes to bring its collec tions together—
literature, images, and biological data, to name a few—and cr eate a rich 
integrative platform for data-driven discovery and data-powered health. 
NLM will create computabl e libraries of data, models, and liter ature and devise 
an interlocked envir onment that enables discovery; this effort will be guided by 
principled decisions in collections management and curation, and propelled 
by practices that fos ter open science and scholarship.  It will  also build upon 
research advances in bi omedical informatic s and data science.  Par tnerships 
with domain scientists, health professionals, information profes sionals, and the 
public will guide the design of discovery and analy sis tools to improve the 
insight borne o f data, information, and knowledge.  Or ganizational 
infrastructure will als o be modified to support new sci ence and services.
Goals and Objectives
8

--- PAGE 14 matched=['GOAL\n1', 'Objective 1', 'Strategic Plan'] ---
9
Objective 1.1:   
Connect the resources of a digital research enterprise
NLM will enhance its efforts to collect, organize, 
and disseminate well-understood (literature) and 
non-traditional research objects, notably, but 
not only, data.  These collections of information, 
whether physical or digital, are fuel for ideas, 
knowledge, insight, and progress.  The value of 
individual collections can be multiplied when col-
lections of different, but related, objects can be 
searched, interrogated, and analyzed, and their 
insights integrated, aggregated, and shared.
NLM will lead this process by creating, collecting, 
and curating digital research objects such as 
articles, data sets, analyt
 ic strategies, and visual-
iza
tion t
ools, as well as executable objects such 
as workflows, analytic pipelines, simulations, 
and predictive models. Systems will be designed 
around the FAIR principles of making informa-
tion Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and 
Re-usable.  Modern approaches to attribution will 
be devised. 
NLM will modernize NLM collections and 
services, and enhance the integration and 
interoperability of existing collection
 s. In so 
doing, it will ensure the responsiveness of col-
lections to a broad range of information needs.  
NLM will ensure the operational and curatorial 
efficiency of collection management. This may 
include developing new methods of automa
 ted 
indexing
 and designing innovativ e approaches 
to presenting information that promotes interop-
erability among resources and, importantly, 
facilitates linking to resources not housed in 
NLM.
NLM will develop new collections to reflect 
sci
entific progress and meet new scientific 
needs. Collection development and reten tion 
decisi
ons will be based on program priorities 
and informed via partnerships with stakeholders. 
While some new resources will be incorpo-
rated through acquisition by NLM, others will be 
integrated through federation, coordination, or 
other connections with the integrated platform. 
Recognizing the importance of knowledge 
resources, NLM will form partnerships for 
connecting with these resources across and 
outside NIH. 
NLM recognizes the potential for addressing the 
continuing challenge of health disparities 
t
hrough integrated and aggregated collection of 
multiple types 
of data and analytic tools. In 
creating a platform for discovery, NLM is 
committed to offering a resource that is useful for 
advancing basic and translational research on 
health disparities. Factors important for such 
research include a broad ra
nge of individual 
and population characteristics - everything 
ranging from biological determinants of health 
t
o demographic characteristics. In addition to 
incorporating relevant content in the information 
collections, NLM will promote the development 
and use of standards for data collection and 
reporting that will enable aggregation of data and 
identification of subpopulations for analysis. In 
unique ways like these, and more, NLM contrib-
utes to the NIH Minority Health and Health 
Dispar
ities Strategic Plan.1
NLM will augment its literature and genomics 
collections to create a platform for science and 
health from new sources, such as:
Data gener
ated from scientific research:   
New investigations generate not only hypoth-
eses resolution but also data as a significant 
scientific product. The number of data repos-
itories for research datasets is increasing, 
along with the volume of dat

--- PAGE 15 matched=['GOAL\n1'] ---
10
and set the policies to guide the selection of 
repositories and their investment. NLM will 
also develop approaches and infrastructure 
for accommodating new classes of research 
data, in addition to enabling access to 
externally-hosted resources. In addition, NLM 
will engage with the entire NIH to determine 
how to accommodate data generated in large 
NIH research initiatives such as the BRAIN 
Initiative, 
All of Us, and the Cancer Moonshot.
Curation an d standards:  NLM develops, 
houses, supports, and stewards many health 
data standards that promote interoperability. 
These sets of standards include: terminolo-
gies and vocabularies, data formats, value 
sets, common data elements, and coding 
systems related to clinical phenomena. There 
remain many other types of data for which 
standard representations must be developed, 
including biological, environmental, behav-
ioral, and interactional. NLM will devise new 
methods of generating standards, maintain-
ing version control, and applying them at 
the appropriate point in the data life cycle. 
An important research direction will develop 
strategies for curation at scale, and those 
that accelerate the standards development 
and application process.  In partnership with 
community stakeholders, NLM will consider 
how to use its collections and their intercon-
nectivity to facilitate application of standards, 
as well as how to help user communities 
increase the uniformity and the interoperability 
of standards.
Data science tools and other execut-
ables: 
  NLM will play a role in creating new 
methodologies and new ways of organizing 
collections of data science tools. Examples 
include: libraries of mathematical models; 
indexed visualization tools; reusable data 
analytic models for health applications; open 
source software and algorithms; research 
workflows; statistical, diagnostic, or predictive 
models; or
 collections of machine-execut-
able knowledge. These will not replace, but 
will be integrated with, resources that reside 
within NIH Institutes and Centers, their grant-
ees’ institutions, or other public and private 
organizations. NLM will work with stakehold-
ers to identify tools for dissemination and to 
develop
 policies to guide decisions for incor-
porating them within the NLM platform.
Clinical data:  NLM must create the controls 
for effective stewardship of data generated 
in the course of clinical care as well as from 
clinical investigations. NLM will work with EHR 
vendors and clinical care institutions to foster 
linkage and reuse, as well as to house special 
collections. Aggregated collections of such 
data, properly curated, will enable analyses 
of subpopulations based on aspects of their 
medical care and on demographic character-
istics. NLM engagement arises from strong 
commit-ment to facilitate research in minority 
health and health disparities.
NLM will enrich its flagship clinical trial regis-
try and repository, ClinicalTrials.gov, through 
improved
 front-end and back-end design. 
Enhancements to expand interoperability with 
data and information in other resources, such 
as individual-level data collected in the course 
of the trials supported by NIH, will be consid-
ered, along with improvements in operational 
efficiency in producing, curating, and ensuring 
long-term preservation of this resource. 
Status indicators of the health of people 
and
 communities:   Growing recognition 
of the importance of social, behavioral, and 
en

--- PAGE 16 matched=['GOAL\n1', 'Objective 1'] ---
11
data, models, and analytical tools. Creating 
efficient ways to link the literature with associ-
ated datasets enables knowledge generation 
and discovery. Initial approaches to connect 
datasets associated with papers in PubMed 
Central will be enriched with a complex envi-
ronment interlocking data, literature reports, 
science profiles, and research proposals.  
NLM will anticipate developments such as 
preprints and novel alternatives to the jour-
nal issue as a mode of organizing articles. 
This includes the concept of an “executable 
article,” in which human-readable text can 
be combined with computer-interpretable 
representations of the evidence and guidance 
contained in a publication. Decomposing 
articles into components including interactive 
visualizations, decision analyses, executable 
models and simulations (e.g., of physiologic 
or molecular processes), and predictive and 
decision-analytic inference systems will 
enhance the value and extension of science.
Heal
th information for th e public:  NLM 
prov
ides portals to authoritative health 
information from NIH and other government 
agencies, as well as private sources. In the 
future, the goal is to provide that informa-
tion in a way that makes it more actionable. 
In addition, there is a need to complement 
existing information by providing linkages 
to relevant data from multiple sources, such 
as environmental contaminant or exposure 
data and disease outbreak data, to enable 
an integrated presentation of information in 
understandable
 formats such as customizable 
das
hboards.  NLM will engage with commer-
cial and non-commercial web search and 
health information providers to preserve its 
responsibility as a trustworthy provider of 
health information.  
Objective 1.2:  
Advance research and development in biomedical 
informatics and data science    
As a platform for discovery, NLM plays a sig-
nificant role throughout the entire research 
lifecycle, from initial inspiration through scholarly 
communication.  NLM must anticipate research 
directions of the biomedical and clinical health 
science, prepare the tools necessary to accel-
erate discovery, and enable efficiencies in 
communication and dissemination.  NLM has the 
responsibility to foster
 problem-inspired research 
across the various health science disciplines 
while accelerating the development of domain-
independent, reusable approaches to discovery, 
curation, analytics, and collections. 
Biomedical scientists of today tell of a future 
where food itself becomes medicine, where 
understanding the context of health extends far 
beyond the intracellular environment to the built 
environment of homes and cities, where the data 
flows needed to
 characterize health phenomena 
move at speed of light and are far too dense to 
be captured by standard databases.  NLM, in 
close partnerships with the biomedical and clin-
ical research disciplines, will build the discovery 
and knowledge resources and tools needed while 
tailoring its investments to leverage the best of 
the disciplines. 
NLM must anticipate research 
directions of the biomedical and 
clinical health science, prepare 
the tools necessary to accelerate 
discovery, and enable efficiencies in 
communication and dissemination.  
GOAL
1

--- PAGE 17 matched=['GOAL\n1', 'Objective 1', 'mission'] ---
12
First among these resources and tools will be the 
devising of a system of digital research objects, 
articles, datasets, computational pathways, 
analytical models, visualization  tools, reference 
standards, and the like, each of which will have a 
unique identifier and could be coupled in novel 
modes to accelerate discovery in a broad array of 
disciplinary explorations.  NLM will provide the 
accelerators and the repositories of future 
discoveries, and enable newer and more efficient 
dissemination
 mechanisms.
Connecting collections of digital objects so that 
the whole is greater than the sum of its parts 
presents bi
g computational and scientific chal-
lenges. Surmounting these challenges will require 
data science and informatics research and 
development, 
including innovation in curation, 
analytics, visualization, modeling, knowl-
edge generation and next-generation mining 
approaches. These innovations, in turn, depend 
on advances in the science and mathematics 
underpinning such approaches. This research 
agenda will require more investment in intramural 
and extramural res
earch support and pursuing 
partners whose participation will augment these 
efforts. 
Below are examples that illustrate how such 
research is integrally related to the mission and 
future of NLM and NIH.
•
 With the science and health sectors produc-
ing more digital research objects—whether
research-generated datasets, electronic
health records, or computational models—
value can be added through curation. A key
area for research is how curation at scale 
might be accomplished for hundreds of mil-
lions of such objects in a way that would be 
workable across biomedical domains, health 
care sectors, public health, and consumer 
health.  Automatic, autonomous curation 
strategies will allow for operational efficiency 
as well as accelerate the speed of discovery.
•  Analytics beyond statistics, data presentation
beyond visualization, and “data mining using
meaning” across heterogeneous data sources
are important areas for advancing data sci-
ence. Research and development of artificial
intelligence in its many forms, including nat-
ural language processing and deep learning,
require stimulation, demonstration, testing,
and curation.
• Computable biomedical knowledge—such as
diagnostic, predictive, and decision-analytic
models, or practice guidelines represented
as coded digital objects—is an increasingly
important complement to human-readable
knowledge represented in books and journals.
• Define the structure and functions of “execut-
able articles” that form an interactive library
where the resources “talk to each other” and
enable movement from data to knowledge
and knowledge to action.
• A rich set of data resources presents the
opportunity to pursue basic research on
data-driven questions in biomedical domains.
NLM will partner with scientists across NIH
to generate research questions and identify
value solutions.
Objective 1.3:  
Foster open science policies and practices
NLM will become an advocate for open science, 
and thereby promote access to the products 
and processes of scientific research—that is, 
making them widely accessible. NLM will 
continue to develop tools that support open 
science, including information and data systems 
that preserve and make publications, data, and 
other research outputs discoverable and acces-
sible to the broadest possible audiences.  It will 
continue to develop technologies and systems 
that provid

--- PAGE 18 matched=['GOAL\n1', 'Objective 1', 'mission'] ---
13
e.g., to protect privacy, confidentiality, security, 
and certain proprietary rights.  
Beyond its systems and services, NLM has an 
essential role to play in helping develop and 
implement policies and practices that facilitate 
open science and data-driven research, while 
addressing the complex challenges of investiga-
tor freedom and patient privacy. These include 
policies related to data sharing, privacy protec-
tion, and informed consent that can motivate 
open science practices consistent with legal 
and ethical considerations.  With productive 
relationships across NIH and the Department of 
Health and Human Services, NLM is positioned 
to participate in the reformulations necessary to 
allow open science to flourish, and can bring to 
these policy debates the practical experience in 
system building that can ensure effective policy 
and implementation.
Objective 1.4:  
Create a sustainable institutional, physical, 
and compu
tational infrastructure
For NLM to become the hub for data science 
and open science activities at NIH, it must also 
make an organizational commitment to cre-
ating an institutional home, which will provide 
for organizational stability, fiscal accountability 
for data science efforts, and coordination of 
resources, investments, and communication. 
In devising the best structure to accomplish its 
data science mission, NLM must consider the 
key activities to be accomplished; how to best 
leverage existing data science efforts; and the 
possibility of a hybrid structure in which a perma-
nent, clearly identified institutional locus for data 
science and open science exists in concert with 
the distributed nature of data science talent and 
investment.
NLM will make creative use of a constrained 
physical space while advocating for a larger 
and more appropriate physical environment. 
Sufficient space is needed for the current 
staff, which is distributed across several sites. 
Additionally, fit-for-purpose space is needed 
to house and support its physical and digital 
collections to guarantee long-term access. As a 
national biomedical library, NLM takes seriously 
the responsibility to ensure the preservation of its 
unique collections of books and medical heritage 
embodied in information artifacts. 
NLM’s mission is dependent on the viability of 
its data centers and the computation platforms 
therein. It needs to ensure adequate capacity 
and reliability in the electrical, mechanical, and 
structural infrastructure that supports NLM data 
centers to meet future computational demands. 
It must experiment with innovative computer 
and network solution strategies.  Technical and 
policy solutions must accompany curation and 
collection management activities. Key technical 
challenges include authentication and authori -
zation, assuring compliance with permissions 
required for data access and re-use, and security 
of data sets and session permission. 
NLM will become an advocate 
for open science, and thereby 
promote access to the products 
and processes of scientific 
research—that is, making them 
widely accessible.
GOAL
1

--- PAGE 19 matched=['GOAL 2', 'Goals and Objectives'] ---
14
GOAL 2: 
Reach more people 
in more ways through 
enhanced dissemination 
and engagement pathways 
NLM must understand and meet the needs of the stakeholders it serves: scholarl y, 
cli
nical and communit y.  A future of data-powered health will be built upon new 
mode
ls for interacting with information and data in innovative ways that can 
a
ccelerate discovery and lead to knowledge that informs decisions and action. 
Adv
ancing science and improving health is tied to potential users being aware 
of NL
M resources, having access to them, and understanding their use. NLM 
continually strives to understand user needs and how they vary over time and 
acro
ss different categories of users, and to create new and better ways to deliver 
the r
ight information, at the right level of sophistication, and at the right time.
In designing its dissemination initiatives, NLM is committed to developing 
approaches to innovation and outreach in which information access can 
help 
communities across the US improve health.
Goals and Objectives

--- PAGE 20 matched=['GOAL\n2', 'Objective 2'] ---
15
Objective 2.1:  
Know NLM users and engage with persistence
As new resources and services bring new users 
with new information needs, NLM will need to 
create pathways to reach them with relevant 
information at times the information is needed. 
Users will range from librarians to researchers, 
policy-makers to teens, clinicians to parents, 
pharma to public health laboratories. Each of 
these user groups will require unique patterns of 
e
ngagement. User engagement encompasses 
promoting awareness of information resources, 
understanding information needs, facilitating 
access, and ensuring ability to use information 
resources. 
NLM will develop strategies to increase its vis-
ibility among intended audiences across the 
nation.  Modern
 human factors and human 
computer design strategies will guide public 
facing utilities redesign that feature the National 
Library of Medicine and National Institutes of 
Health brand.  Attention to design principles that 
draw from user experience are needed.  
Partnerships with NIH Institutes will also be 
systemically cultivated and highlighted. 
R
ecognizing that people live in communities, 
NLM will employ person-centric and community 
conscious design strategies. This requires an 
investment in research to better understand 
health information needs and how to address 
them. It will prioritize increasing awareness of 
NLM services to members of the community in 
or
der to support NLM’s commitment to helping 
the public employ information interv entions to 
improve health. 
NLM will employ rapid cycle design and deliver y 
approaches that  reflect knowl edge both of what 
the user seeks from its resources as well as why 
they are seeking it.  It is also important 
to underst and user needs in the moment. 
Approaches to dissemination must reflect differ-
ent motivations for seeking information as well as 
disparities in health and data literacy among NLM 
constituencies.
Human networks remain important and will be 
leveraged to expand outreach across the U.S. 
NLM will continue to utilize the 6,500 member 
libraries of the National Network of Libraries of 
Medicine (NNLM) to serve in a trusted, visible 
manner for engaging and reaching out to the 
wide range of NLM users. With the NNLM, NLM 
will emphasize expanding partnerships with 
public libraries and community groups to improve 
awareness of NLM’s resources and to obtain 
feedback for im
provement. The NNLM is partner-
ing with the NIH All of Us Research Program to 
support community engagement efforts by public 
libraries and raise awareness about the program.
User engagement encompasses 
promoting awareness of information 
resources, understanding information 
needs, facilitating access, and 
ensuring ability to use information 
resources. 
GOAL
2

--- PAGE 21 matched=['GOAL\n2', 'Objective 2'] ---
16
Objective 2.2:  
Foster distinctiveness of NLM as a reliable, trustable 
source of health information and biomedical data
The information and data resources provided 
by NLM are becoming ever-more essential to 
biomedical discovery and contemporary health 
care while also becoming increasingly invisible as 
this information and data become embedded in 
the processes and products of our users.  NLM 
is essential to public health authorities, who 
query its genomic data banks daily to discern the 
nature of a foodborne pathogen; essential to hos-
pitals for demonstrating quality of care through 
using a MedlinePlus Connect embedded link to 
clinical systems to provide patients with tailored, 
trusted health instructions; essential to the over 
four million users who daily access its literature 
and biological databases. New devices found 
along t
he Internet-of-Things open an entirely 
new dissemination outlet for NLM resources.  As 
NLM resources become more widely embedded 
in search engines and informational instructions, 
NLM must find ways to demonstrate its 
oversight and promote the chain of trust in health 
information.  
Those who recognize the NLM brand—libraries, 
research scientists, health professionals and the 
lay public—know and trust its information 
resource
s.  Even though millions of people use 
NLM’s information services every day, there 
remains a persistent lack of name recognition 
and underappreciation for the vast number and 
variety of services provided by the NLM. NLM 
must make itself accessible and known to those 
who do not yet recognize its brand nor know 
of its services. Public awareness campaigns, 
better branding of the NLM-provided resources, 
and educating scientists and the public in best 
practices for health information and health data 
management will extend the chain of trust and 
improve discovery and care through greater reli-
ance on trusted health information.   
NLM will aim to become recognized widely as the 
pre-eminent source of trusted information for the 
nation’s health. It will increase public awareness 
and the public’s trust in NLM-provided materials 
not only by devising ways to convey the NLM 
imprimatur 
on materials, but also through creative 
engageme
nt that raises the general awareness of 
NLM as a place to turn to with health questions 
or biomedical data needs.  Envision a campaign 
“NLM: your most trusted partner in health”. 
Objective 2.3:  
Support research in biomedical and health  
information access methods and information 
dissemination strategies
NLM will support programs of research in areas 
such as rapid cycle information processing, 
and will undertake new research to bring new 
information products to new users.  It will focus 
on understanding ho
w searches are initiated, 
how information is used, and how questions are 
NLM will aim to become recognized 
widely as the pre-eminent source of 
trusted information for the nation’s 
health. 
GOAL
2

--- PAGE 22 matched=['GOAL\n2', 'Objective 2', 'research areas'] ---
17
posed and answered. The Library will provide 
important advances in delivering guidance for 
action or decision making and provide insight 
through advanced visualizations of complex 
data. NLM will continue supporting and under-
taking informatics and data science research to 
design advanced interfaces and query systems 
that facilitate access to information systems 
in new ways and reflect the information needs 
and behaviors of individuals. This will include 
investigating the best methods to deliver effec-
tive information to support team science, 
family caregiving, and care coordination. Some 
examples of research areas that contribute to 
innovation in information access and delivery 
include human-computer interaction, natural 
language proc
 essing, virtual and augmented 
reality for system interaction, probabilistic infer-
ence mechanisms for sense-making from
  data 
visualization, and predictive analytics.  To meet 
the needs of a broad audience for information 
services, NLM must also conduct research to 
address matters of literacy, numeracy, and mak-
ing i
nformation actionable in the moment.
Objective 2.4: Enhance information delivery 
NLM will provide access to information on 
multiple delivery platforms and through multiple 
user-centric interface formats, including ways 
that are very different from today’s formats. 
Strategies will be developed to provide better 
interlinking of resources to improve discovery.
In addition to designing fresh approaches for 
querying databases on demand, NLM will 
consider implementing push models that will 
anticipate user needs, operate continuously 
to search for new information, and engage 
them with results in a just in time manner. New 
approaches to input and output formats will be 
explored from the research front, including voice, 
music, image, and virtual reality applications. 
Partnerships with other NIH Institutes that are 
addressing information delivery challenges may 
lead to innovat
ions in information delivery as well 
as new platforms.
To promote ease of access to NLM resources, 
interfaces th
at are more uniform across NLM 
platforms will be developed. It will explore voice, 
gesture, and behavioral interfaces, while attempt-
ing to ensure a predictable experience.   Use 
of a common interface will not only improve 
accessibility of resources, it will complement the 
enhancements in interoperability and findability 
of related resources. Through test bed exper-
imentation with new ways to improve search 
quality and usability, NLM will offer a better user 
experience for finding information faster, with a 
clean modern interface, and with better support 
for mobile devices.
Given the range of uses of NLM’s resources, 
NLM will continue to offer multiple delivery 
platforms, including application programming 
interfaces (APIs), mobile, social media, web-
based, and stand-alone applications that can 
operate without internet access. New presenta-
tion modes that do not require the user to read, 
but still allow user control, will be explored. 
Fundamental to these efforts is recognizing that 
the fastest growing group of NLM users are actu-
ally digital devices that engage with the systems 
automatically.
To promote ease of access to NLM 
resources, interfaces that are more 
uniform across NLM platforms will 
be developed. It will explore voice, 
gesture, and behavioral interfaces, 
while attempting to ensure a 
predictable experience.   
GOAL
2

--- PAGE 23 matched=['GOAL 3', 'Goals and Objectives'] ---
18
GOAL 3: 
Build a workforce for 
data-dr
iven research 
and health
 
To assure a future of data-driven discovery and health, it is essential to have 
a biomedical informatics and data science workforce prepared to make 
conceptual and methodological advances in analytics, visualization, mining, and 
other methods needed to use data for discoveries and to make it interoperable 
with existing knowledge. A new generation of librarians who are as capable of 
collecting and disseminating data resources as they are with more familiar forms 
of scholarly communications is also needed.  The roles of the informationist and 
the librarian must expand to support a world where massive industrial search 
engines provide immediate access to vast stores of knowledge, while threatening 
to overwhelm the scholar, patient, and clinician with unfettered lists of potentially 
relevant resources.  
NLM must also play a role in creating a broader biomedical sciences workforce 
capable of data-driven discovery. New approaches to investigation will exist side-
by-side with familiar experimental and exploratory methodologies.  Training must 
foster the development of scholars with expertise in both biomedical informatics or 
data science and expertise in a biomedical or clinical domain. Both are needed in 
order to develop and deploy usable and useful applications harnessing the power 
of data to advance knowledge and improve health.
Goals and Objectives

--- PAGE 24 matched=['GOAL\n3', 'mission'] ---
19
Workforce development is a cornerstone of NLM ’s mission. Training initiatives 
tha
t prepare researchers for the evolving challenges of data-driven research 
will complement training that provides rapid, just-in-time and just-as-needed 
prepa
ration for scientists and others. Current programs will be expanded and 
revise
d to seize scientific opportunities, form new partnerships, build capacit y, and 
ensure a robust workforce for scientific discovery in the coming decades. Novel 
models of t
raining, from three-minute videos to immersive, group-based problem-
solvin
g challenges, will engender team science skills and interdisciplinary learning. 
Initiatives to increase the size and expertise of the workforce will include a focus 
on strategies to recruit, develop, and retain talent in biomedical informatics and 
data science. NLM will also engage in efforts to inspire the next generation in the 
power of data and information for progress in science and better health. 
Obje
ctiv
e 3.1:  
Expand and enhance research training for biomedical 
informatics and data science
NLM has primary responsibility for ensuring an 
adequate supply of advanced research scientists 
to conduct research in biomedical informatics 
and data science and to serve as mentors and 
trainers of the next generation. Important skills 
for all researchers include being prepared to 
“compute in context;” extract meaning and 
insight from aggregations of
 data; and create 
new ways to analyze, visualize, mine, and inte-
grate data and information.  Specialists must 
be developed to meet the challenge of
 enabling 
dynamic, real-time curation at the scale and 
complexity that the future of biomedical data and 
information holds. 
NLM will train a new generation of data scientists 
to complement its current doctoral training for 
translational research, bioinformatics, con
sumer 
health informatics, and clinical and public health 
informatics.  The emphasis on data science and 
management of large and complex biomedical 
big data will be expanded in NLM’s existing uni-
versity-based training programs. This
 will include 
infusing data science with security and privacy 
m anagement concepts in addition to next-gen-
eration curation, dissemination, and analytic 
approaches within data science.  This increased 
focus will produce cadres of scientists who can 
develop a new array of tools and approaches for 
data, moving analytics beyond statistics, pre-
sentation beyond visualization, and more.  NLM 
is strongly committed to ensuring an enduring 
professoriate for biomedical informatics, library 
and information science, and data science. 
Specialists must be developed to 
meet the challenge of enabling 
dynamic, real-time curation at the 
scale and complexity that the future 
of biomedical data and information 
holds.   
GOAL
3

--- PAGE 25 matched=['GOAL\n20', 'Objective 3'] ---
Intramural training at NLM will be expanded 
through full post-doctoral fellowships in bioinfor-
matics and computational biology, educational 
rotations in biomedical informatics, and 
post-graduate fellowships in library and informa-
tion science. Leveraging an intramural research 
program on advanced analytics, NLM will offer 
short-term and extended training engagements 
involving interdisciplinary teams of scholars to 
craft the next generation artificial intelligence 
and machine learning methodologies. Particular 
emphasis will be placed on generating innovative 
methods to manage and disseminate the vast 
electronic resources of the NLM. 
Objective 3.2:  
Assure data science and open science proficiency 
Data science—accelerating i nsights from data 
through purposeful methodologies—and op en 
science—a commitment to making all aspects of 
the research process from design to data acces-
sible to scientists, professionals, and society 
at large—combine to create a new paradigm 
for training. Preparing a workforce to address 
biomedical data science problems will involve 
enhancing the computational and statistical skills 
of researchers with biomedical knowledge, and 
training computer scientists to apply their work to 
biomedical problems. In deve
loping training 
approaches, NLM will combine these two cross-
training goals to support the emerging field of 
biomedical data science. To expand its training 
initiatives, NLM will partner with other agencies, 
universities, and online education providers. 
Prepare clinicians and biomedical research-
ers to utilize data resources and interpret 
data science-based r esearch 
findings.   NLM 
will collaborate across NIH to develop a core 
curriculum for data science training embedded 
in institute specific training programs. It will 
also help ensure that domain specific university 
training and mid-career training awards meet 
proficiencies for data science.  Working with 
partners, NLM will identify strategies to facilitate 
data science instruction in innovative ways such 
as modular approaches or self-directed learn-
ing, encompassing such topics as advanced 
analytics, data standards, data 
management, 
reproducibility, and data sharing.
Training for stewardship. Data stewardship is 
fundamental to open science and must become 
a fundamental component of every research 
p roject and program. The commitment to open 
science is expanding g
lobally, with data shar-
ing and reuse becoming the norm across many 
biomedical research disciplines. Investigators 
need assistance to ensure that data generated 
in research projects will be findable, accessi-
ble, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) and will 
be effectively managed and curated across the 
research life cycle. As NIH develops new policies 
that guide data management and data sharing, 
NLM will develop tools and resources that help 
research teams under
stand and comply with 
policies. 
Preparing a workforce to address 
biomedical data science problems 
will involve enhancing the 
computational and statistical skills 
of researchers with biomedical 
knowledge, and training computer 
scientists to apply their work to 
biomedical problems.
GOAL
20
3

--- PAGE 26 matched=['GOAL\n3', 'Objective 3'] ---
Promote competencies in open science and data 
science for information professionals.  
As librarians and other information professionals 
meet the evolving needs of scientific research 
communities, they play a particularly important 
role in fostering op
en science, data management, 
data
 sharing, and development of repositories. 
Programs that enable such roles in promoting 
data and open science support—provided by 
NLM, through NNLM, or in partnerships with 
professional associations—ensure the availability of 
a trained workforce to support data science, data 
reuse, and responsible data stewardship.  
With the growing participation in citizen science, 
public librarians require special support and 
information on data management and interpreta-
tion of data-driven discovery. 
NLM will share responsibility with educational 
institutions,
 industry, and other federal agen-cies 
to ensure the development of a technical 
workforce capable of supporting data-driven 
discovery and advanced data management. 
Post-baccalaureate
 training programs in d ata 
management, medical library science, and 
clinical research data support are three such 
opportunities. 
GOAL
3
Objective 3.3:  
Engage the next generation and promote data literacy
Generations who grew up in a technological-
ly-rich world bring a certain skill set to health 
sciences and biomedical services. Developing 
a workforce that is well prepared to meet the 
challenges of 21st century science still requires 
initiatives to develop an enthusiasm for science 
and data at an early age. NLM will cultivate 
and inspire the next generation of biomedical 
informatics researchers, data scientists, and 
information professionals. In collaboration with 
public and private partners, NLM will develop 
initiatives to spark students’ interest in science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics 
(STEM). These initiatives will include ways to 
identify skills that will be needed and design 
targeted educational resources for learners from 
elementary school to college.    
Engagement with data is not limited to those 
who work in formal research or clinical roles. 
The public needs a basic level of scientific and 
data literacy. NLM will work with organizations, 
educational institutions, and public libraries to 
contribute to increasing public understanding 
and appreciation of science. 
Developing a workforce that is well 
prepared to meet the challenges of 
21st century science still requires 
initiatives to develop an enthusiasm 
for science and data at an early age. 
21

--- PAGE 27 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
Appendix A
References and Notes
National Institutes of Health (2015) 
NIH-Wide Strategic Plan, Fiscal Years 2016-2020: Turning Discovery Into Health. [online]  
Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health.  
Available at: https://www.nih.gov/sites/default/files/about-nih/strategic-plan-fy2016-2020-508.pdf 
[Accessed 23 Jan 2018].
National Institutes of Health 
Advisory Committee to the Director, National Library of Medicine Working Group (2015).  
Final Report—June 11, 2015. [online]  
Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health.  
Available at: https://acd.od.nih.gov/documents/reports/Report-NLM-06112015-ACD.pdf  
[Accessed 23 Jan 2018].
National Institutes of Health, Data and Informatics Working Group (2012).  
Draft Report to The Advisory Committee to the Director. [online]  
Available at: https://acd.od.nih.gov/documents/reports/DataandInformaticsWorkingGroupReport.pdf  
[Accessed 23 Jan 2018].
1 NLM contributes to the Trans-NIH Minority Health and Health Disparities Strategic Plan and complies with  
Section 2031(c)(B) of the 21st Century Cures Act.
Appendix B
NLM Authorizing Legislation and Executive 
Branch Assignments 
1956 The National Library of Medicine Act of 1956 (Public law 84-941) estab-
lished the National Library of Medicine (NLM) by renaming the Armed Forces 
Medical Library and transferring the Library to the Public Health Service in the 
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (DHEW). The Act defines NLM’s 
purpose “… to assist the advancement of medical and related sciences and to 
aid the dissemination and exchange of scientific and other information import-
ant to the progress of medicine and to the public health.”  Its basic functions 
are to acquire, preserve, and make available materials pertinent to medicine, 
broadly defined; to prepare and make available indexes, catalogs, and bibliog-
raphies of the materials; and to provide reference and research assistance.  The 
Act also established the NLM Board of Regents to advise, consult with, and 
make recommendations to the Secretary on matters of Library policy, includ-
ing the acquisition of materials, the scope, content, and organization of Library 
services, and the rules under which its materials, publications, facilities, and 
services are made available to users. 
Appendices
22

--- PAGE 29 matched=['Strategic Plan'] ---
2008 The Consolidated Appropriations Act required NIH-funded investigators to sub-
mit final peer-reviewed journal manuscripts to NLM’s PubMed Central, making 
NIH’s previously voluntary public access policy mandatory.  This requirement 
was made permanent in the Omnibus Appropriations Act, 2009.  
2013 The President’s Office of Science and Technology Policy issued a directive 
requiring all Federal agencies with more than $100 million per year in R&D 
expenditures to establish and implement public access policies similar to NIH’s 
and to develop policies for increasing access to digital data. As of 2018, all HHS 
agencies and five other Federal departments and agencies had elected to use 
PubMed Central to implement their policies. 
Appendix C
NLM Strategic Plan Planning Process
Overall development of the 2017-2027 strategic plan was guided by the Board of 
Regents Strategic Planning Subcommittee, which was appointed at the September 
2016 meeting of the Board of Regents.  Members are Daniel R. Masys (co-chair), Jill 
Taylor (co-chair), Robert A. Greenes, Eric J. Horvitz, James L. Olds, and Sandra I. 
Martin. Discussions with the Board were held during its meetings in 2017, with final 
approval at the February 2018 meeting.  
Working in conjunction with NLM Planning staff, the Strategic Planning Subcommittee 
of the Board of Regents identified four themes as a framework for considering NLM’s 
priorities and future directions, and around which public input was solicited. 
These themes were: 
• Advancing data science, open science, and biomedical informatics
• Advancing biomedical discovery and translational science
• Supporting the public's health: clinical systems, public health systems
and services, and personal health
• Building collections to support discovery and health in the 21st century
In addition, the following topics were considered across the four themes: partnerships, 
user communities, user engagement and educational outreach, international engage -
ment, health disparities, standards, infrastructure, workforce development, research 
needs and funding.
NLM engaged the broader community and its own staff in the strategic planning 
process through several approaches: Request for Information (RFI), Expert Working 
Groups, Institutional Training Site Visits, Staff Survey, and NLM Town Hall meetings.
Request for Information  
On November 8, 2016, NLM issued an RFI (https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-
files/NOT-LM-17-002.html) based on the four themes to solicit input from its broad 
stakeholder community on goals and priorities for NLM's next strategic plan. The RFI 
24

--- PAGE 30 matched=['Strategic Plan', 'vision'] ---
was active through January 23, 2017.  NLM received 111 responses from a wide range 
of stakeholders including librarians, researchers, historians, first responders, nurses, 
informaticians, associations, and the public. 
In addition, more than 600 responses were reviewed i n response to the 2015 RFI 
(https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-15-067.html) issued by NIH on 
behalf of the NLM Working Group of the Advisory Committee to the NIH Director (ACD); 
that report was designed to obtain input on a vision for the future of NLM in the context 
of NLM's leadership transition and emerging NIH data science priorities. The subse-
quent report of the ACD Working Group report issued in June 2015 also informed our 
planning process (http://acd.od.nih.gov/reports/Report-NLM-06112015-ACD.pdf), as did 
the ACD Data and Informatics Working Group Repor t of 2012 (https://acd.od.nih.gov/
documents/reports/DataandInformaticsWorkingGroupReport.pdf ), and the NIH-Wide 
Strategic Plan, Fiscal Years 2016-2020: Turning Discovery Into Health (https://www.nih.
gov/sites/default/files/about-nih/strategic-plan-fy2016-2020-508.pdf). 
Expert working groups  
Working groups of outside experts were convened around each of the four themes, with 
meetings held from March to May 2017. In these working groups, more than 100 people 
met to consider ways to propel the NLM forward, strategically and meaningfully. A fifth 
internal working group of NLM staff met to consider the reports from the four external 
groups, generate additional ideas, and synthesize and prioritize recommendations.
Training Site Visits 
NLM leadership made a series of visits to NLM’s university-based training programs for 
research careers in biomedical informatics and data science. The purpose of the visits 
was to discuss the scope and characteristics of NLM’s training programs, particularly 
local perceptions about the benefits and challenges being faced and their strategies for 
incorporating data science into their programs. Separate meetings were held with three 
groups at each location: faculty, program administrators, and trainees. Ten programs 
were visited between October 2016 and June 2017, including five visits to private institu-
tions and 5 to public institutions.  
NLM Staff Input 
A staff survey soliciting input about NLM operations was available online or in paper 
format, which enabled anonymous responses to be placed in secure suggestion boxes 
in each of the office buildings where NLM staff work. The NLM planning team reviewed 
the 112 survey responses.  
Town Hall meetings open to all Federal employees and contractors at NLM were held 
in February 2017 and August 2017. The NLM leadership team shared information and 
responded to questions about the planning process and the needs of NLM moving 
into the next decade. The first meeting brought together 500 staff members, and 351 
staff attended the second meeting. Staff questions covered a broad range of topics, 
including data science, collections, media, global health, partnerships at NIH and in the 
community, reorganization, communication, workforce development, facilities, and NLM 
culture. 
25

--- PAGE 33 matched=['Division of '] ---
Shannon D. Jones, MLS, M.Ed., AHIP 
Director of Libraries & Associate Professor 
Medical University of South Carolina Libraries
Marty LaVenture, PhD, MPH, FACMI 
Director 
Office of Health IT, e-Health and Informatics 
Minnesota Department of Health
Cynthia A Lindquist, PhD, MPA
President 
Cankdeska Cikana (Little Hoop) Community 
College (CCCC)
Thomas S. Nesbitt, MD, MPH  
Associate Vice Chancellor, Strategic 
Technologies and Alliances  
Director, Center for Health & Technology 
Professor, Department of Family and Community 
Medicine 
UC Davis Health
Casey Overby, PhD
Assistant Professor, Divisions of General Internal 
Medicine and Health Sciences Informatics  
Department of Medicine 
Johns Hopkins University
Wanda Pratt, PhD
Professor, Information School 
Adjunct, Division of Biomedical & Health 
Informatics, Medical School 
University of Washington
Eric C. Schneider, MD, MSc, FACP
Senior Vice President for Policy and Research 
The Commonwealth Fund
William W. Stead, MD 
Chief Strategy Officer 
McKesson Foundation Professor of Biomedical 
Informatics 
Professor of Medicine 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center
Paul Tang, MD, MS
Vice President  
IBM Watson Health
Jill Taylor, PhD
Director, Wadsworth Center 
Faculty, Wadsworth School of Laboratory 
Sciences 
New York State Department of Health
Andrew (Andy) M. Wiesenthal, MD, SM 
Managing Director  
Health Care Practice  
Deloitte Consulting, LLP
Role of NLM in Building Collections to Support Discovery 
and Hea
lth in the 21st Century
Chair:
Patricia (Pat) L. Thibodeau, MLS, MBA
Associate Dean for Library Services and Archives (Retired April 2017) 
Duke Medical Center Library & Archives
Members:
Amy Bernard, PhD
Product Architect 
Allen Institute for Brain Science
Laura Brown, MA, MFA
Executive Vice President 
Ithaka 
JSTOR Managing Director
Sayeed Choudhury, MS
Associate Dean, Research Data Management  
Director, Digital Research and Curation Center 
Sheridan Libraries  
Johns Hopkins University
Yolanda Cooper, BGS, MLS
University Librarian 
Robert W. Woodruff Library 
Emory Libraries and Information Technology
28

--- PAGE 36 matched=['Division of '] ---
Working Group of NLM Internal Experts
Chair:
Michael F. Huerta, PhD
NLM Coordinator of Data & Open Science Initiatives 
Associate Director for Program Development
Members:
Stacey Arnesen, MS
Head, Office of Disaster Information Management 
Research Center (DIMRC) 
Division of Specialized Information Services 
Joyce Backus, MS
Associate Director for Library Operations
Ivor D’Souza, MS
Director, Information Systems 
Office of Computer and Communications 
Systems
Todd Danielson, MS
Executive Officer and Associate Director for 
Administrative Management
Dina Demner-Fushman, MD, PhD
Staff Scientist, Computer Engineering Branch  
Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical 
Communications 
Valerie Florance, PhD
Associate Director for Extramural Programs 
Kathryn Funk, MLIS
Program Specialist, PubMed Central  
National Center for Biotechnology Information
Pertti (Bert) Hakkinen, PhD
Acting Head, Office of Clinical Toxicology 
Division of Specialized Information Services  
Stefan Jaeger, PhD
Visiting Scientist, Computer Engineering Branch  
Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical 
Communications
David Landsman, PhD
Chief, Computational Biology Branch 
Bioinformatics of Chromatin Structure Group 
National Center for Biotechnology Information 
Wei Ma, MS
Chief, Applications Branch 
Office of Computer and Communications 
Systems 
Jennifer Marill, MS, MA
Chief, Technical Services Division 
Divisio
n of Library Operations 
James G. Mork, MS
Computer Scientist, Computer Engineering 
Branch & Lead Developer and Technical Project 
Lead, Medical Text Indexer (MTI) project 
Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical 
Communications
Duc Nguyen, MS
Chief, Medical Language Branch 
Office of Computer and Communications 
Systems
Ilene Mizrachi, PhD
Staff Scientist, GenBank
National Center for Biotechnology Information 
Jeffrey S. Reznick, PhD
Chief 
History of Medicine Division 
Division of Library Operations
Valerie Schneider, PhD
Staff Scientist, RefSeq 
National Center for Biotechnology Information 
Jerry Sheehan, MS
Assistant Director for Policy Development 
Office of the Director
Hua-Chuan Sim, MD
Chief Program Officer, Clinical and Public Health 
Informatics Research, Applied informatics and 
Career Awards 
Extramural Programs Division
31
